articles

Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome
International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium*
* A partial list of authors appears on the opposite page. Af®liations are listed at the end of the paper.

............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

The human genome holds an extraordinary trove of information about human development, physiology, medicine and evolution. Here we report the results of an international collaboration to produce and make freely available a draft sequence of the human genome. We also present an initial analysis of the data, describing some of the insights that can be gleaned from the sequence.
The rediscovery of Mendel's laws of heredity in the opening weeks of the 20th century1±3 sparked a scienti®c quest to understand the nature and content of genetic information that has propelled biology for the last hundred years. The scienti®c progress made falls naturally into four main phases, corresponding roughly to the four quarters of the century. The ®rst established the cellular basis of heredity: the chromosomes. The second de®ned the molecular basis of heredity: the DNA double helix. The third unlocked the informational basis of heredity, with the discovery of the biological mechanism by which cells read the information contained in genes and with the invention of the recombinant DNA technologies of cloning and sequencing by which scientists can do the same. The last quarter of a century has been marked by a relentless drive to decipher ®rst genes and then entire genomes, spawning the ®eld of genomics. The fruits of this work already include the genome sequences of 599 viruses and viroids, 205 naturally occurring plasmids, 185 organelles, 31 eubacteria, seven archaea, one fungus, two animals and one plant. Here we report the results of a collaboration involving 20 groups from the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan, France, Germany and China to produce a draft sequence of the human genome. The draft genome sequence was generated from a physical map covering more than 96% of the euchromatic part of the human genome and, together with additional sequence in public databases, it covers about 94% of the human genome. The sequence was produced over a relatively short period, with coverage rising from about 10% to more than 90% over roughly ®fteen months. The sequence data have been made available without restriction and updated daily throughout the project. The task ahead is to produce a ®nished sequence, by closing all gaps and resolving all ambiguities. Already about one billion bases are in ®nal form and the task of bringing the vast majority of the sequence to this standard is now straightforward and should proceed rapidly. The sequence of the human genome is of interest in several respects. It is the largest genome to be extensively sequenced so far, being 25 times as large as any previously sequenced genome and eight times as large as the sum of all such genomes. It is the ®rst vertebrate genome to be extensively sequenced. And, uniquely, it is the genome of our own species. Much work remains to be done to produce a complete ®nished sequence, but the vast trove of information that has become available through this collaborative effort allows a global perspective on the human genome. Although the details will change as the sequence is ®nished, many points are already clear. X The genomic landscape shows marked variation in the distribution of a number of features, including genes, transposable elements, GC content, CpG islands and recombination rate. This gives us important clues about function. For example, the developmentally important HOX gene clusters are the most repeat-poor regions of the human genome, probably re¯ecting the very complex
860

coordinate regulation of the genes in the clusters. X There appear to be about 30,000±40,000 protein-coding genes in the human genomeÐonly about twice as many as in worm or ¯y. However, the genes are more complex, with more alternative splicing generating a larger number of protein products. X The full set of proteins (the `proteome') encoded by the human genome is more complex than those of invertebrates. This is due in part to the presence of vertebrate-speci®c protein domains and motifs (an estimated 7% of the total), but more to the fact that vertebrates appear to have arranged pre-existing components into a richer collection of domain architectures. X Hundreds of human genes appear likely to have resulted from horizontal transfer from bacteria at some point in the vertebrate lineage. Dozens of genes appear to have been derived from transposable elements. X Although about half of the human genome derives from transposable elements, there has been a marked decline in the overall activity of such elements in the hominid lineage. DNA transposons appear to have become completely inactive and long-terminal repeat (LTR) retroposons may also have done so. X The pericentromeric and subtelomeric regions of chromosomes are ®lled with large recent segmental duplications of sequence from elsewhere in the genome. Segmental duplication is much more frequent in humans than in yeast, ¯y or worm. X Analysis of the organization of Alu elements explains the longstanding mystery of their surprising genomic distribution, and suggests that there may be strong selection in favour of preferential retention of Alu elements in GC-rich regions and that these `sel®sh' elements may bene®t their human hosts. X The mutation rate is about twice as high in male as in female meiosis, showing that most mutation occurs in males. X Cytogenetic analysis of the sequenced clones con®rms suggestions that large GC-poor regions are strongly correlated with `dark G-bands' in karyotypes. X Recombination rates tend to be much higher in distal regions (around 20 megabases (Mb)) of chromosomes and on shorter chromosome arms in general, in a pattern that promotes the occurrence of at least one crossover per chromosome arm in each meiosis. X More than 1.4 million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human genome have been identi®ed. This collection should allow the initiation of genome-wide linkage disequilibrium mapping of the genes in the human population. In this paper, we start by presenting background information on the project and describing the generation, assembly and evaluation of the draft genome sequence. We then focus on an initial analysis of the sequence itself: the broad chromosomal landscape; the repeat elements and the rich palaeontological record of evolutionary and biological processes that they provide; the human genes and proteins and their differences and similarities with those of other
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
Genome Sequencing Centres (Listed in order of total genomic sequence contributed, with a partial list of personnel. A full list of contributors at each centre is available as Supplementary Information.) Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Center for Genome Research: Eric S. Lander1*, Lauren M. Linton1, Bruce Birren1*, Chad Nusbaum1*, Michael C. Zody1*, Jennifer Baldwin1, Keri Devon1, Ken Dewar1, Michael Doyle1, William FitzHugh1*, Roel Funke1, Diane Gage1, Katrina Harris1, Andrew Heaford1, John Howland1, Lisa Kann1, Jessica Lehoczky1, Rosie LeVine1, Paul McEwan1, Kevin McKernan1, James Meldrim1, Jill P. Mesirov1*, Cher Miranda1, William Morris1, Jerome Naylor1, Christina Raymond1, Mark Rosetti1, Ralph Santos1, Andrew Sheridan1, Carrie Sougnez1, Nicole Stange-Thomann1, Nikola Stojanovic1, Aravind Subramanian1 & Dudley Wyman1 The Sanger Centre: Jane Rogers2, John Sulston2*, Rachael Ainscough2, Stephan Beck2, David Bentley2, John Burton2, Christopher Clee2, Nigel Carter2, Alan Coulson2, Rebecca Deadman2, Panos Deloukas2, Andrew Dunham2, Ian Dunham2, Richard Durbin2*, Lisa French2, Darren Grafham2, Simon Gregory2, Tim Hubbard2*, Sean Humphray2, Adrienne Hunt2, Matthew Jones2, Christine Lloyd2, Amanda McMurray2, Lucy Matthews2, Simon Mercer2, Sarah Milne2, James C. Mullikin2*, Andrew Mungall2, Robert Plumb2, Mark Ross2, Ratna Shownkeen2 & Sarah Sims2 Washington University Genome Sequencing Center: Robert H. Waterston3*, Richard K. Wilson3, LaDeana W. Hillier3*, John D. McPherson3, Marco A. Marra3, Elaine R. Mardis3, Lucinda A. Fulton3, Asif T. Chinwalla3*, Kymberlie H. Pepin3, Warren R. Gish3, Stephanie L. Chissoe3, Michael C. Wendl3, Kim D. Delehaunty3, Tracie L. Miner3, Andrew Delehaunty3, Jason B. Kramer3, Lisa L. Cook3, Robert S. Fulton3, Douglas L. Johnson3, Patrick J. Minx3 & Sandra W. Clifton3 US DOE Joint Genome Institute: Trevor Hawkins4, Elbert Branscomb4, Paul Predki4, Paul Richardson4, Sarah Wenning4, Tom Slezak4, Norman Doggett4, Jan-Fang Cheng4, Anne Olsen4, Susan Lucas4, Christopher Elkin4, Edward Uberbacher4 & Marvin Frazier4 Baylor College of Medicine Human Genome Sequencing Center: Richard A. Gibbs5*, Donna M. Muzny5, Steven E. Scherer5, John B. Bouck5*, Erica J. Sodergren5, Kim C. Worley5*, Catherine M. Rives5, James H. Gorrell5, Michael L. Metzker5, Susan L. Naylor6, Raju S. Kucherlapati7, David L. Nelson, & George M. Weinstock8 RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center: Yoshiyuki Sakaki9, Asao Fujiyama9, Masahira Hattori9, Tetsushi Yada9, Atsushi Toyoda9, Takehiko Itoh9, Chiharu Kawagoe9, Hidemi Watanabe9, Yasushi Totoki9 & Todd Taylor9 Genoscope and CNRS UMR-8030: Jean Weissenbach10, Roland Heilig10, William Saurin10, Francois Artiguenave10, Philippe Brottier10, Thomas Bruls10, Eric Pelletier10, Catherine Robert10 & Patrick Wincker10 GTC Sequencing Center: Douglas R. Smith11, Lynn Doucette-Stamm11, Marc Ruben®eld11, Keith Weinstock11, Hong Mei Lee11 & JoAnn Dubois11 Department of Genome Analysis, Institute of Molecular Â Biotechnology: Andre Rosenthal12, Matthias Platzer12, Gerald Nyakatura12, Stefan Taudien12 & Andreas Rump12 Beijing Genomics Institute/Human Genome Center: Huanming Yang13, Jun Yu13, Jian Wang13, Guyang Huang14 & Jun Gu15 Multimegabase Sequencing Center, The Institute for Systems Biology: Leroy Hood16, Lee Rowen16, Anup Madan16 & Shizen Qin16 Stanford Genome Technology Center: Ronald W. Davis17, Nancy A. Federspiel17, A. Pia Abola17 & Michael J. Proctor17 Stanford Human Genome Center: Richard M. Myers18, Jeremy Schmutz18, Mark Dickson18, Jane Grimwood18 & David R. Cox18 University of Washington Genome Center: Maynard V. Olson19, Rajinder Kaul19 & Christopher Raymond19 Department of Molecular Biology, Keio University School of Medicine: Nobuyoshi Shimizu20, Kazuhiko Kawasaki20 & Shinsei Minoshima20 University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas: Glen A. Evans21², Maria Athanasiou21 & Roger Schultz21 University of Oklahoma's Advanced Center for Genome Technology: Bruce A. Roe22, Feng Chen22 & Huaqin Pan22 Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics: Juliane Ramser23, Hans Lehrach23 & Richard Reinhardt23 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Lita Annenberg Hazen Genome Center: W. Richard McCombie24, Melissa de la Bastide24 & Neilay Dedhia24 GBFÐGerman Research Centre for Biotechnology: È Helmut Blocker25, Klaus Hornischer25 & Gabriele Nordsiek25 * Genome Analysis Group (listed in alphabetical order, also includes individuals listed under other headings): Richa Agarwala26, L. Aravind26, Jeffrey A. Bailey27, Alex Bateman2, Sera®m Batzoglou1, Ewan Birney28, Peer Bork29,30, Daniel G. Brown1, Christopher B. Burge31, Lorenzo Cerutti28, Hsiu-Chuan Chen26, Deanna Church26, Michele Clamp2, Richard R. Copley30, Tobias Doerks29,30, Sean R. Eddy32, Evan E. Eichler27, Terrence S. Furey33, James Galagan1, James G. R. Gilbert2, Cyrus Harmon34, Yoshihide Hayashizaki35, David Haussler36, Henning Hermjakob28, Karsten Hokamp37, Wonhee Jang26, L. Steven Johnson32, Thomas A. Jones32, Simon Kasif38, Arek Kaspryzk28, Scot Kennedy39, W. James Kent40, Paul Kitts26, Eugene V. Koonin26, Ian Korf3, David Kulp34, Doron Lancet41, Todd M. Lowe42, Aoife McLysaght37, Tarjei Mikkelsen38, John V. Moran43, Nicola Mulder28, Victor J. Pollara1, È Chris P. Ponting44, Greg Schuler26, Jorg Schultz30, Guy Slater28, Arian F. A. Smit45, Elia Stupka28, Joseph Szustakowki38, Danielle Thierry-Mieg26, Jean Thierry-Mieg26, Lukas Wagner26, John Wallis3, Raymond Wheeler34, Alan Williams34, Yuri I. Wolf26, Kenneth H. Wolfe37, Shiaw-Pyng Yang3 & Ru-Fang Yeh31 Scienti®c management: National Human Genome Research Institute, US National Institutes of Health: Francis Collins46*, Mark S. Guyer46, Jane Peterson46, Adam Felsenfeld46* & Kris A. Wetterstrand46; Of®ce of Science, US Department of Energy: Aristides Patrinos47; The Wellcome Trust: Michael J. Morgan48

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

861

articles
organisms; and the history of genomic segments. (Comparisons are drawn throughout with the genomes of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans, the fruit¯y Drosophila melanogaster and the mustard weed Arabidopsis thaliana; we refer to these for convenience simply as yeast, worm, ¯y and mustard weed.) Finally, we discuss applications of the sequence to biology and medicine and describe next steps in the project. A full description of the methods is provided as Supplementary Information on Nature's web site (http://www. nature.com). We recognize that it is impossible to provide a comprehensive analysis of this vast dataset, and thus our goal is to illustrate the range of insights that can be gleaned from the human genome and thereby to sketch a research agenda for the future. (4) The development of random shotgun sequencing of complementary DNA fragments for high-throughput gene discovery by Schimmel12 and Schimmel and Sutcliffe13, later dubbed expressed sequence tags (ESTs) and pursued with automated sequencing by Venter and others14±20. The idea of sequencing the entire human genome was ®rst proposed in discussions at scienti®c meetings organized by the US Department of Energy and others from 1984 to 1986 (refs 21, 22). A committee appointed by the US National Research Council endorsed the concept in its 1988 report23, but recommended a broader programme, to include: the creation of genetic, physical and sequence maps of the human genome; parallel efforts in key model organisms such as bacteria, yeast, worms, ¯ies and mice; the development of technology in support of these objectives; and research into the ethical, legal and social issues raised by human genome research. The programme was launched in the US as a joint effort of the Department of Energy and the National Institutes of Health. In other countries, the UK Medical Research Council and the Wellcome Trust supported genomic research in Britain; the Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain and the French Muscular Dystrophy Association launched mapping efforts in France; government agencies, including the Science and Technology Agency and the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture supported genomic research efforts in Japan; and the European Community helped to launch several international efforts, notably the programme to sequence the yeast genome. By late 1990, the Human Genome Project had been launched, with the creation of genome centres in these countries. Additional participants subsequently joined the effort, notably in Germany and China. In addition, the Human Genome Organization (HUGO) was founded to provide a forum for international coordination of genomic research. Several books24±26 provide a more comprehensive discussion of the genesis of the Human Genome Project. Through 1995, work progressed rapidly on two fronts (Fig. 1). The ®rst was construction of genetic and physical maps of the human and mouse genomes27±31, providing key tools for identi®cation of disease genes and anchoring points for genomic sequence. The second was sequencing of the yeast32 and worm33 genomes, as
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

Background to the Human Genome Project
The Human Genome Project arose from two key insights that emerged in the early 1980s: that the ability to take global views of genomes could greatly accelerate biomedical research, by allowing researchers to attack problems in a comprehensive and unbiased fashion; and that the creation of such global views would require a communal effort in infrastructure building, unlike anything previously attempted in biomedical research. Several key projects helped to crystallize these insights, including: (1) The sequencing of the bacterial viruses FX1744,5 and lambda6, the animal virus SV407 and the human mitochondrion8 between 1977 and 1982. These projects proved the feasibility of assembling small sequence fragments into complete genomes, and showed the value of complete catalogues of genes and other functional elements. (2) The programme to create a human genetic map to make it possible to locate disease genes of unknown function based solely on their inheritance patterns, launched by Botstein and colleagues in 1980 (ref. 9). (3) The programmes to create physical maps of clones covering the yeast10 and worm11 genomes to allow isolation of genes and regions based solely on their chromosomal position, launched by Olson and Sulston in the mid-1980s.
1984 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994

Discussion and debate in scientific community NRC report Bacterial genome sequencing Other organisms H. flu S. cerevisiae sequencing E. coli 39 species

C. elegans sequencing D. melanogaster sequencing A. thaliana sequencing Genetic maps Microsatellites SNPs

Mouse

Physical maps cDNA sequencing Genomic sequencing Genetic maps Microsatellites ESTs
Pilot sequencing

Full length

SNPs

Human

Physical maps cDNA sequencing Genomic sequencing ESTs
Pilot project,15%

Full length
Working draft, 90% Finishing, ~100%

Chromosome 22 Chromosome 21

Figure 1 Timeline of large-scale genomic analyses. Shown are selected components of work on several non-vertebrate model organisms (red), the mouse (blue) and the human
862

(green) from 1990; earlier projects are described in the text. SNPs, single nucleotide polymorphisms; ESTs, expressed sequence tags.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
well as targeted regions of mammalian genomes34±37. These projects showed that large-scale sequencing was feasible and developed the two-phase paradigm for genome sequencing. In the ®rst, `shotgun', phase, the genome is divided into appropriately sized segments and each segment is covered to a high degree of redundancy (typically, eight- to tenfold) through the sequencing of randomly selected subfragments. The second is a `®nishing' phase, in which sequence gaps are closed and remaining ambiguities are resolved through directed analysis. The results also showed that complete genomic sequence provided information about genes, regulatory regions and chromosome structure that was not readily obtainable from cDNA studies alone. In 1995, genome scientists considered a proposal38 that would have involved producing a draft genome sequence of the human genome in a ®rst phase and then returning to ®nish the sequence in a second phase. After vigorous debate, it was decided that such a plan was premature for several reasons. These included the need ®rst to prove that high-quality, long-range ®nished sequence could be produced from most parts of the complex, repeat-rich human genome; the sense that many aspects of the sequencing process were still rapidly evolving; and the desirability of further decreasing costs. Instead, pilot projects were launched to demonstrate the feasibility of cost-effective, large-scale sequencing, with a target completion date of March 1999. The projects successfully produced ®nished sequence with 99.99% accuracy and no gaps39. They also introduced bacterial arti®cial chromosomes (BACs)40, a new largeinsert cloning system that proved to be more stable than the cosmids and yeast arti®cial chromosomes (YACs)41 that had been used previously. The pilot projects drove the maturation and convergence of sequencing strategies, while producing 15% of the human genome sequence. With successful completion of this phase, the human genome sequencing effort moved into full-scale production in March 1999. The idea of ®rst producing a draft genome sequence was revived at this time, both because the ability to ®nish such a sequence was no longer in doubt and because there was great hunger in the scienti®c community for human sequence data. In addition, some scientists favoured prioritizing the production of a draft genome sequence over regional ®nished sequence because of concerns about commercial plans to generate proprietary databases of human sequence that might be subject to undesirable restrictions on use42±44. The consortium focused on an initial goal of producing, in a ®rst production phase lasting until June 2000, a draft genome sequence covering most of the genome. Such a draft genome sequence, although not completely ®nished, would rapidly allow investigators to begin to extract most of the information in the human sequence. Experiments showed that sequencing clones covering about 90% of the human genome to a redundancy of about four- to ®vefold (`halfshotgun' coverage; see Box 1) would accomplish this45,46. The draft genome sequence goal has been achieved, as described below. The second sequence production phase is now under way. Its aims are to achieve full-shotgun coverage of the existing clones during 2001, to obtain clones to ®ll the remaining gaps in the physical map, and to produce a ®nished sequence (apart from regions that cannot be cloned or sequenced with currently available techniques) no later than 2003. libraries with more uniform representation. The practice of sequencing from both ends of double-stranded clones (`double-barrelled' shotgun sequencing) was introduced by Ansorge and others37 in 1990, allowing the use of `linking information' between sequence fragments. The application of shotgun sequencing was also extended by applying it to larger and larger DNA moleculesÐfrom plasmids (, 4 kilobases (kb)) to cosmid clones37 (40 kb), to arti®cial chromosomes cloned in bacteria and yeast55 (100±500 kb) and bacterial genomes56 (1±2 megabases (Mb)). In principle, a genome of arbitrary size may be directly sequenced by the shotgun method, provided that it contains no repeated sequence and can be uniformly sampled at random. The genome can then be assembled using the simple computer science technique of `hashing' (in which one detects overlaps by consulting an alphabetized look-up table of all k-letter words in the data). Mathematical analysis of the expected number of gaps as a function of coverage is similarly straightforward57. Practical dif®culties arise because of repeated sequences and cloning bias. Small amounts of repeated sequence pose little problem for shotgun sequencing. For example, one can readily assemble typical bacterial genomes (about 1.5% repeat) or the euchromatic portion of the ¯y genome (about 3% repeat). By contrast, the human genome is ®lled (. 50%) with repeated sequences, including interspersed repeats derived from transposable elements, and long genomic regions that have been duplicated in tandem, palindromic or dispersed fashion (see below). These include large duplicated segments (50±500 kb) with high sequence identity (98±99.9%), at which mispairing during recombination creates deletions responsible for genetic syndromes. Such features complicate the assembly of a correct and ®nished genome sequence. There are two approaches for sequencing large repeat-rich genomes. The ®rst is a whole-genome shotgun sequencing approach, as has been used for the repeat-poor genomes of viruses, bacteria and ¯ies, using linking information and computational
Hierarchical shotgun sequencing

Genomic DNA

BAC library Organized mapped large clone contigs

BAC to be sequenced

Shotgun clones Shotgun ...ACCGTAAATGGGCTGATCATGCTTAAA TGATCATGCTTAAACCCTGTGCATCCTACTG... sequence Assembly ...ACCGTAAATGGGCTGATCATGCTTAAACCCTGTGCATCCTACTG...

Strategic issues
Hierarchical shotgun sequencing

Soon after the invention of DNA sequencing methods47,48, the shotgun sequencing strategy was introduced49±51; it has remained the fundamental method for large-scale genome sequencing52±54 for the past 20 years. The approach has been re®ned and extended to make it more ef®cient. For example, improved protocols for fragmenting and cloning DNA allowed construction of shotgun
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

Figure 2 Idealized representation of the hierarchical shotgun sequencing strategy. A library is constructed by fragmenting the target genome and cloning it into a largefragment cloning vector; here, BAC vectors are shown. The genomic DNA fragments represented in the library are then organized into a physical map and individual BAC clones are selected and sequenced by the random shotgun strategy. Finally, the clone sequences are assembled to reconstruct the sequence of the genome.
863

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
analysis to attempt to avoid misassemblies. The second is the `hierarchical shotgun sequencing' approach (Fig. 2), also referred to as `map-based', `BAC-based' or `clone-by-clone'. This approach involves generating and organizing a set of large-insert clones (typically 100±200 kb each) covering the genome and separately performing shotgun sequencing on appropriately chosen clones. Because the sequence information is local, the issue of long-range misassembly is eliminated and the risk of short-range misassembly is reduced. One caveat is that some large-insert clones may suffer rearrangement, although this risk can be reduced by appropriate quality-control measures involving clone ®ngerprints (see below). The two methods are likely to entail similar costs for producing ®nished sequence of a mammalian genome. The hierarchical approach has a higher initial cost than the whole-genome approach, owing to the need to create a map of clones (about 1% of the total cost of sequencing) and to sequence overlaps between clones. On the other hand, the whole-genome approach is likely to require much greater work and expense in the ®nal stage of producing a ®nished sequence, because of the challenge of resolving misassemblies. Both methods must also deal with cloning biases, resulting in under-representation of some regions in either large-insert or small-insert clone libraries. There was lively scienti®c debate over whether the human genome sequencing effort should employ whole-genome or hierarchical shotgun sequencing. Weber and Myers58 stimulated these discussions with a speci®c proposal for a whole-genome shotgun approach, together with an analysis suggesting that the method could work and be more ef®cient. Green59 challenged these conclusions and argued that the potential bene®ts did not outweigh the likely risks. In the end, we concluded that the human genome sequencing effort should employ the hierarchical approach for several reasons. First, it was prudent to use the approach for the ®rst project to sequence a repeat-rich genome. With the hierarchical approach, the ultimate frequency of misassembly in the ®nished product would probably be lower than with the whole-genome approach, in which it would be more dif®cult to identify regions in which the assembly was incorrect. Second, it was prudent to use the approach in dealing with an outbred organism, such as the human. In the whole-genome shotgun method, sequence would necessarily come from two different copies of the human genome. Accurate sequence assembly could be complicated by sequence variation between these two copiesÐboth SNPs (which occur at a rate of 1 per 1,300 bases) and larger-scale structural heterozygosity (which has been documented in human chromosomes). In the hierarchical shotgun method, each largeinsert clone is derived from a single haplotype. Third, the hierarchical method would be better able to deal with inevitable cloning biases, because it would more readily allow targeting of additional sequencing to under-represented regions. And fourth, it was better suited to a project shared among members of a diverse international consortium, because it allowed work and responsibility to be easily distributed. As the ultimate goal has always been to create a high-quality, ®nished sequence to serve as a foundation for biomedical research, we reasoned that the advantages of this more conservative approach outweighed the additional cost, if any. A biotechnology company, Celera Genomics, has chosen to incorporate the whole-genome shotgun approach into its own efforts to sequence the human genome. Their plan60,61 uses a mixed strategy, involving combining some coverage with wholegenome shotgun data generated by the company together with the publicly available hierarchical shotgun data generated by the International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium. If the raw sequence reads from the whole-genome shotgun component are made available, it may be possible to evaluate the extent to which the sequence of the human genome can be assembled without the need
864

for clone-based information. Such analysis may help to re®ne sequencing strategies for other large genomes.
Technology for large-scale sequencing

Sequencing the human genome depended on many technological improvements in the production and analysis of sequence data. Key innovations were developed both within and outside the Human Genome Project. Laboratory innovations included four-colour ¯uorescence-based sequence detection62, improved ¯uorescent dyes63±66, dye-labelled terminators67, polymerases speci®cally designed for sequencing68±70, cycle sequencing71 and capillary gel electrophoresis72±74. These studies contributed to substantial improvements in the automation, quality and throughput of collecting raw DNA sequence75,76. There were also important advances in the development of software packages for the analysis of sequence data. The PHRED software package77,78 introduced the concept of assigning a `base-quality score' to each base, on the basis of the probability of an erroneous call. These quality scores make it possible to monitor raw data quality and also assist in determining whether two similar sequences truly overlap. The PHRAP computer package (http://bozeman.mbt.washington.edu/phrap.docs/phrap. html) then systematically assembles the sequence data using the base-quality scores. The program assigns `assembly-quality scores' to each base in the assembled sequence, providing an objective criterion to guide sequence ®nishing. The quality scores were based on and validated by extensive experimental data. Another key innovation for scaling up sequencing was the development by several centres of automated methods for sample preparation. This typically involved creating new biochemical protocols suitable for automation, followed by construction of appropriate robotic systems.
Coordination and public data sharing

The Human Genome Project adopted two important principles with regard to human sequencing. The ®rst was that the collaboration would be open to centres from any nation. Although potentially less ef®cient, in a narrow economic sense, than a centralized approach involving a few large factories, the inclusive approach was strongly favoured because we felt that the human genome sequence is the common heritage of all humanity and the work should transcend national boundaries, and we believed that scienti®c progress was best assured by a diversity of approaches. The collaboration was coordinated through periodic international meetings (referred to as `Bermuda meetings' after the venue of the ®rst three gatherings) and regular telephone conferences. Work was shared ¯exibly among the centres, with some groups focusing on particular chromosomes and others contributing in a genome-wide fashion. The second principle was rapid and unrestricted data release. The centres adopted a policy that all genomic sequence data should be made publicly available without restriction within 24 hours of assembly79,80. Pre-publication data releases had been pioneered in mapping projects in the worm11 and mouse genomes30,81 and were prominently adopted in the sequencing of the worm, providing a direct model for the human sequencing efforts. We believed that scienti®c progress would be most rapidly advanced by immediate and free availability of the human genome sequence. The explosion of scienti®c work based on the publicly available sequence data in both academia and industry has con®rmed this judgement.

Generating the draft genome sequence
Generating a draft sequence of the human genome involved three steps: selecting the BAC clones to be sequenced, sequencing them and assembling the individual sequenced clones into an overall draft genome sequence. A glossary of terms related to genome sequencing and assembly is provided in Box 1. The draft genome sequence is a dynamic product, which is regularly updated as additional data accumulate en route to the
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
ultimate goal of a completely ®nished sequence. The results below are based on the map and sequence data available on 7 October 2000, except as otherwise noted. At the end of this section, we provide a brief update of key data.
Clone selection

The hierarchical shotgun method involves the sequencing of overlapping large-insert clones spanning the genome. For the Human Genome Project, clones were largely chosen from eight large-insert libraries containing BAC or P1-derived arti®cial chromosome (PAC) clones (Table 1; refs 82±88). The libraries were made by
Box 1 Genome glossary

partial digestion of genomic DNA with restriction enzymes. Together, they represent around 65-fold coverage (redundant sampling) of the genome. Libraries based on other vectors, such as cosmids, were also used in early stages of the project. The libraries (Table 1) were prepared from DNA obtained from anonymous human donors in accordance with US Federal Regulations for the Protection of Human Subjects in Research (45CFR46) and following full review by an Institutional Review Board. Brie¯y, the opportunity to donate DNA for this purpose was broadly advertised near the two laboratories engaged in library

Sequence

Raw sequence Individual unassembled sequence reads, produced by sequencing of clones containing DNA inserts. Paired-end sequence Raw sequence obtained from both ends of a cloned insert in any vector, such as a plasmid or bacterial arti®cial chromosome. Finished sequence Complete sequence of a clone or genome, with an accuracy of at least 99.99% and no gaps. Coverage (or depth) The average number of times a nucleotide is represented by a high-quality base in a collection of random raw sequence. Operationally, a `high-quality base' is de®ned as one with an accuracy of at least 99% (corresponding to a PHRED score of at least 20). Full shotgun coverage The coverage in random raw sequence needed from a large-insert clone to ensure that it is ready for ®nishing; this varies among centres but is typically 8±10-fold. Clones with full shotgun coverage can usually be assembled with only a handful of gaps per 100 kb. Half shotgun coverage Half the amount of full shotgun coverage (typically, 4±5-fold random coverage).

Sequenced-clone contigs Contigs produced by merging overlapping sequenced clones. Sequenced-clone-contig scaffolds Scaffolds produced by joining sequenced-clone contigs on the basis of linking information. Draft genome sequence The sequence produced by combining the information from the individual sequenced clones (by creating merged sequence contigs and then employing linking information to create scaffolds) and positioning the sequence along the physical map of the chromosomes. N50 length A measure of the contig length (or scaffold length) containing a `typical' nucleotide. Speci®cally, it is the maximum length L such that 50% of all nucleotides lie in contigs (or scaffolds) of size at least L.

Computer programs and databases

Clones

BAC clone Bacterial arti®cial chromosome vector carrying a genomic DNA insert, typically 100±200 kb. Most of the large-insert clones sequenced in the project were BAC clones. Finished clone A large-insert clone that is entirely represented by ®nished sequence. Full shotgun clone A large-insert clone for which full shotgun sequence has been produced. Draft clone A large-insert clone for which roughly half-shotgun sequence has been produced. Operationally, the collection of draft clones produced by each centre was required to have an average coverage of fourfold for the entire set and a minimum coverage of threefold for each clone. Predraft clone A large-insert clone for which some shotgun sequence is available, but which does not meet the standards for inclusion in the collection of draft clones.

PHRED A widely used computer program that analyses raw sequence to produce a `base call' with an associated `quality score' for each position in the sequence. A PHRED quality score of X corresponds to an error probability of approximately 10- X/10. Thus, a PHRED quality score of 30 corresponds to 99.9% accuracy for the base call in the raw read. PHRAP A widely used computer program that assembles raw sequence into sequence contigs and assigns to each position in the sequence an associated `quality score', on the basis of the PHRED scores of the raw sequence reads. A PHRAP quality score of X corresponds to an error probability of approximately 10- X/10. Thus, a PHRAP quality score of 30 corresponds to 99.9% accuracy for a base in the assembled sequence. GigAssembler A computer program developed during this project for merging the information from individual sequenced clones into a draft genome sequence. Public sequence databases The three coordinated international sequence databases: GenBank, the EMBL data library and DDBJ.

Map features

Contigs and scaffolds

Contig The result of joining an overlapping collection of sequences or clones. Scaffold The result of connecting contigs by linking information from paired-end reads from plasmids, paired-end reads from BACs, known messenger RNAs or other sources. The contigs in a scaffold are ordered and oriented with respect to one another. Fingerprint clone contigs Contigs produced by joining clones inferred to overlap on the basis of their restriction digest ®ngerprints. Sequenced-clone layout Assignment of sequenced clones to the physical map of ®ngerprint clone contigs. Initial sequence contigs Contigs produced by merging overlapping sequence reads obtained from a single clone, in a process called sequence assembly. Merged sequence contigs Contigs produced by taking the initial sequence contigs contained in overlapping clones and merging those found to overlap. These are also referred to simply as `sequence contigs' where no confusion will result. Sequence-contig scaffolds Scaffolds produced by connecting sequence contigs on the basis of linking information.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

STS Sequence tagged site, corresponding to a short (typically less than 500 bp) unique genomic locus for which a polymerase chain reaction assay has been developed. EST Expressed sequence tag, obtained by performing a single raw sequence read from a random complementary DNA clone. SSR Simple sequence repeat, a sequence consisting largely of a tandem repeat of a speci®c k-mer (such as (CA)15). Many SSRs are polymorphic and have been widely used in genetic mapping. SNP Single nucleotide polymorphism, or a single nucleotide position in the genome sequence for which two or more alternative alleles are present at appreciable frequency (traditionally, at least 1%) in the human population. Genetic map A genome map in which polymorphic loci are positioned relative to one another on the basis of the frequency with which they recombine during meiosis. The unit of distance is centimorgans (cM), denoting a 1% chance of recombination. Radiation hybrid (RH) map A genome map in which STSs are positioned relative to one another on the basis of the frequency with which they are separated by radiation-induced breaks. The frequency is assayed by analysing a panel of human±hamster hybrid cell lines, each produced by lethally irradiating human cells and fusing them with recipient hamster cells such that each carries a collection of human chromosomal fragments. The unit of distance is centirays (cR), denoting a 1% chance of a break occuring between two loci.
865

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
construction. Volunteers of diverse backgrounds were accepted on a ®rst-come, ®rst-taken basis. Samples were obtained after discussion with a genetic counsellor and written informed consent. The samples were made anonymous as follows: the sampling laboratory stripped all identi®ers from the samples, applied random numeric labels, and transferred them to the processing laboratory, which then removed all labels and relabelled the samples. All records of the labelling were destroyed. The processing laboratory chose samples at random from which to prepare DNA and immortalized cell lines. Around 5±10 samples were collected for every one that was eventually used. Because no link was retained between donor and DNA sample, the identity of the donors for the libraries is not known, even by the donors themselves. A more complete description can be found at http://www.nhgri.nih.gov/Grant_info/Funding/Statements/RFA/human_subjects.html. During the pilot phase, centres showed that sequence-tagged sites (STSs) from previously constructed genetic and physical maps could be used to recover BACs from speci®c regions. As sequencing expanded, some centres continued this approach, augmented with additional probes from ¯ow sorting of chromosomes to obtain long-range coverage of speci®c chromosomes or chromosomal regions89±94. For the large-scale sequence production phase, a genome-wide physical map of overlapping clones was also constructed by systematic analysis of BAC clones representing 20-fold coverage of the human genome86. Most clones came from the ®rst three sections of the RPCI-11 library, supplemented with clones from sections of the
Table 1 Key large-insert genome-wide libraries
Library name* GenBank Vector Source DNA abbreviation type Library segment or plate numbers Number of BAC-end Enzyme Average Total number Number of clones in sequence digest insert size of clones in ®ngerprinted (ends/clones/ genome clones² library (kb) layout§ clones with both ends sequenced)³ Sequenced clones used in construction of the draft genome sequence

RPCI-13 and CalTech D libraries (Table 1). DNA from each BAC clone was digested with the restriction enzyme HindIII, and the sizes of the resulting fragments were measured by agarose gel electrophoresis. The pattern of restriction fragments provides a `®ngerprint' for each BAC, which allows different BACs to be distinguished and the degree of overlaps to be assessed. We used these restrictionfragment ®ngerprints to determine clone overlaps, and thereby assembled the BACs into ®ngerprint clone contigs. The ®ngerprint clone contigs were positioned along the chromosomes by anchoring them with STS markers from existing genetic and physical maps. Fingerprint clone contigs were tied to speci®c STSs initially by probe hybridization and later by direct search of the sequenced clones. To localize ®ngerprint clone contigs that did not contain known markers, new STSs were generated and placed onto chromosomes95. Representative clones were also positioned by ¯uorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) (ref. 86 and C. McPherson, unpublished). We selected clones from the ®ngerprint clone contigs for sequencing according to various criteria. Fingerprint data were reviewed86,90 to evaluate overlaps and to assess clone ®delity (to bias against rearranged clones83,96). STS content information and BAC end sequence information were also used91,92. Where possible, we tried to select a minimally overlapping set spanning a region. However, because the genome-wide physical map was constructed concurrently with the sequencing, continuity in many regions was low in early stages. These small ®ngerprint clone contigs were nonetheless useful in identifying validated, nonredundant clones

Numberk Total bases Fraction of (Mb)¶ total from library 518 606 1,367 66.7 88.4 185.6 0.016 0.021 0.043

Caltech B Caltech C Caltech D1 (CITB-H1) Caltech D2 (CITB-E1)

CTB CTC CTD

BAC BAC BAC BAC

987SK cells Human sperm Human sperm Human sperm

All All All All 2,501±2,565 2,566±2,671 3,000±3,253 All All All All All 1 2 3 4 5

HindIII HindIII HindIII

120 125 129

74,496 263,040 162,432

16 144 49,833

2/1/1 21,956/ 14,445/ 7,255 403,589/ 226,068/ 156,631

528 621 1,381

RPCI-1 RPCI-3 RPCI-4 RPCI-5 RPCI-11

RP1 RP3 RP4 RP5 RP11

PAC PAC PAC PAC BAC

Male, blood Male, blood Male, blood Male, blood Male, blood

EcoRI EcoRI EcoRI MboI MboI MboI MboI

202 182 142 110 115 116 115 178 164 168 181 183 196

24,960 46,326 97,536 115,200 75,513 105,251 142,773 543,797 108,499 109,496 109,657 109,382 106,763 1,482,502

3,388

267,931

Total of top eight libraries Total all libraries

EcoRI EcoRI EcoRI EcoRI MboI

379,773/ 243,764/ 134,110

1,070 644 889 1,042 19,405

1,053 638 881 1,033 19,145

117.7 68.5 95.5 116.5 3,165.0

0.028 0.016 0.022 0.027 0.743

321,312 354,510

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... * For the CalTech libraries82, see http://www.tree.caltech.edu/lib_status.html; for RPCI libraries83, see http://www.chori.org/bacpac/home.htm. ² For the FPC map and ®ngerprinting84±86, see http://genome.wustl.edu/gsc/human/human_database.shtml. ³ The number of raw BAC end sequences (clones/ends/clones with both ends sequenced) available for use in human genome sequencing. Typically, for clones in which sequence was obtained from both ends, more than 95% of both end sequences contained at least 100 bp of nonrepetitive sequence. BAC-end sequencing of RPCI-11 and of the CalTech libraries was done at The Institute for Genomic Research, the California Institute of Technology and the University of Washington High Throughput Sequencing Center. The sources for the Table were http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/clone/ BESstat.shtml and refs 87, 88. § These are the clones in the sequenced-clone layout map (http://genome.wustl.edu/gsc/human/Mapping/index.shtml) that were pre-draft, draft or ®nished. k The number of sequenced clones used in the assembly. This number is less than that in the previous column owing to removal of a small number of obviously contaminated, combined or duplicated projects; in addition, not all of the clones from completed chromosomes 21 and 22 were included here because only the available ®nished sequence from those chromosomes was used in the assembly. ¶ The number reported is the total sequence from the clones indicated in the previous column. Potential overlap between clones was not removed here, but Ns were excluded.

805,320/ 484,278/ 297,997 812,594/ 488,017/ 100,775

25,580 30,445

25,241 29,298

3,903.9 4,260.5

0.916 1

866

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

articles
that were used to `seed' the sequencing of new regions. The small ®ngerprint clone contigs were extended or merged with others as the map matured. The clones that make up the draft genome sequence therefore do not constitute a minimally overlapping setÐthere is overlap and redundancy in places. The cost of using suboptimal overlaps was justi®ed by the bene®t of earlier availability of the draft genome sequence data. Minimizing the overlap between adjacent clones would have required completing the physical map before undertaking large-scale sequencing. In addition, the overlaps between BAC clones provide a rich collection of SNPs. More than 1.4 million SNPs have already been identi®ed from clone overlaps and other sequence comparisons97. Because the sequencing project was shared among twenty centres in six countries, it was important to coordinate selection of clones across the centres. Most centres focused on particular chromosomes or, in some cases, larger regions of the genome. We also maintained a clone registry to track selected clones and their progress. In later phases, the global map provided an integrated view of the data from all centres, facilitating the distribution of effort to maximize coverage of the genome. Before performing extensive sequencing on a clone, several centres routinely examined an initial sample of 96 raw sequence reads from each subclone library to evaluate possible overlap with previously sequenced clones.
Sequencing

Figure 3 The automated production line for sample preparation at the Whitehead Institute, Center for Genome Research. The system consists of custom-designed factorystyle conveyor belt robots that perform all functions from purifying DNA from bacterial cultures through setting up and purifying sequencing reactions.

5,000 4,500 4,000 Sequence (Mb) 3,500 3,000 2,500 2,000 1,500 1,000 500 0 Jul-98 Oct-98 Jan-99 Apr-98 Apr-99 Oct-99 Oct-97 Jan-98 Jan-00 Jul-99 Jan-96 Apr-96 Oct-96 Jan-97 Oct-00 Apr-97 Jul-97 Apr-00 Jul-96 Jul-00 Finished Unfinished (draft and pre-draft)

The selected clones were subjected to shotgun sequencing. Although the basic approach of shotgun sequencing is well established, the details of implementation varied among the centres. For example, there were differences in the average insert size of the shotgun libraries, in the use of single-stranded or double-stranded cloning vectors, and in sequencing from one end or both ends of each insert. Centres differed in the ¯uorescent labels employed and in the degree to which they used dye-primers or dye-terminators. The sequence detectors included both slab gel- and capillary-based devices. Detailed protocols are available on the web sites of many of the individual centres (URLs can be found at www.nhgri.nih.gov/ genome_hub). The extent of automation also varied greatly among the centres, with the most aggressive automation efforts resulting in factory-style systems able to process more than 100,000 sequencing reactions in 12 hours (Fig. 3). In addition, centres differed in the amount of raw sequence data typically obtained for each clone (so-called half-shotgun, full shotgun and ®nished sequence). Sequence information from the different centres could be directly integrated despite this diversity, because the data were analysed by a common computational procedure. Raw sequence traces were processed and assembled with the PHRED and PHRAP software packages77,78 (P. Green, unpublished). All assembled contigs of more than 2 kb were deposited in public databases within 24 hours of assembly. The overall sequencing output rose sharply during production (Fig. 4). Following installation of new sequence detectors beginning in June 1999, sequencing capacity and output rose approximately eightfold in eight months to nearly 7 million samples processed per month, with little or no drop in success rate (ratio of useable reads to attempted reads). By June 2000, the centres were producing raw sequence at a rate equivalent to onefold coverage of the entire human genome in less than six weeks. This corresponded to a continuous throughput exceeding 1,000 nucleotides per second, 24 hours per day, seven days per week. This scale-up resulted in a concomitant increase in the sequence available in the public databases (Fig. 4). A version of the draft genome sequence was prepared on the basis of the map and sequence data available on 7 October 2000. For this version, the mapping effort had assembled the ®ngerprinted BACs into 1,246 ®ngerprint clone contigs. The sequencing effort had sequenced and assembled 29,298 overlapping BACs and other largeinsert clones (Table 2), comprising a total length of 4.26 gigabases (Gb). This resulted from around 23 Gb of underlying raw shotgun sequence data, or about 7.5-fold coverage averaged across the genome (including both draft and ®nished sequence). The various contributions to the total amount of sequence deposited in the HTGS division of GenBank are given in Table 3.
Table 2 Total genome sequence from the collection of sequenced clones, by sequence status
Sequence status Number of clones Total clone length (Mb) Average number of sequence reads per kb* 20±25 12 6 Average sequence depth² 8±12 4.5 2.5 Total amount of raw sequence (Mb) 9,085 13,395 667 23,147

Finished Draft Predraft Total

8,277 18,969 2,052

897 3,097 267

Month

Figure 4 Total amount of human sequence in the High Throughput Genome Sequence (HTGS) division of GenBank. The total is the sum of ®nished sequence (red) and un®nished (draft plus predraft) sequence (yellow).
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

............................................................................................................................................................................. * The average number of reads per kb was estimated based on information provided by each sequencing centre. This number differed among sequencing centres, based on the actual protocols used. ² The average depth in high quality bases ($99% accuracy) was estimated from information provided by each sequencing centre. The average varies among the centres, and the number may vary considerably for clones with the same sequencing status. For draft clones in the public databases (keyword: HTGS_draft), the number can be computed from the quality scores listed in the database entry.

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

867

articles
By agreement among the centres, the collection of draft clones produced by each centre was required to have fourfold average sequence coverage, with no clone below threefold. (For this purpose, sequence coverage was de®ned as the average number of times that each base was independently read with a base-quality score corresponding to at least 99% accuracy.) We attained an overall average of 4.5-fold coverage across the genome for draft clones. A few of the sequenced clones fell below the minimum of threefold sequence coverage or have not been formally designated by centres as meeting draft standards; these are referred to as predraft (Table 2). Some of these are clones that span remaining gaps in the draft genome sequence and were in the process of being sequenced on 7 October 2000; a few are old submissions from centres that are no longer active. The lengths of the initial sequence contigs in the draft clones vary as a function of coverage, but half of all nucleotides reside in initial sequence contigs of at least 21.7 kb (see below). Various properties of the draft clones can be assessed from instances in which there was substantial overlap between a draft clone and a ®nished (or nearly ®nished) clone. By examining the sequence alignments in the overlap regions, we estimated that the initial sequence contigs in a draft sequence clone cover an average of about 96% of the clone and are separated by gaps with an average size of about 500 bp. Although the main emphasis was on producing a draft genome sequence, the centres also maintained sequence ®nishing activities during this period, leading to a twofold increase in ®nished sequence from June 1999 to June 2000 (Fig. 4). The total amount of human sequence in this ®nal form stood at more than 835 Mb on 7 October 2000, or more than 25% of the human genome. This includes the ®nished sequences of chromosomes 21 and 22 (refs 93, 94). As centres have begun to shift from draft to ®nished sequencing in the last quarter of 2000, the production of ®nished sequence has increased to an annualized rate of 1 Gb per year and is continuing to rise. In addition to sequencing large-insert clones, three centres generated a large collection of random raw sequence reads from whole-genome shotgun libraries (Table 4; ref. 98). These 5.77 million successful sequences contained 2.4 Gb of high-quality bases; this corresponds to about 0.75-fold coverage and would be statistically expected to include about 50% of the nucleotides in the human genome (data available at http://snp.cshl.org/data). The primary objective of this work was to discover SNPs, by comparing these random raw sequences (which came from different individuals) with the draft genome sequence. However, many of these raw sequences were obtained from both ends of plasmid clones and thereby also provided valuable `linking' information that was used in sequence assembly. In addition, the random raw sequences provide sequence coverage of about half of the nucleotides not yet represented in the sequenced large-insert clones; these can be used as probes for portions of the genome not yet recovered.
Assembly of the draft genome sequence

Table 3 Total human sequence deposited in the HTGS division of GenBank
Sequencing centre Whitehead Institute, Center for Genome Research* The Sanger Centre* Washington University Genome Sequencing Center* US DOE Joint Genome Institute Baylor College of Medicine Human Genome Sequencing Center RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center Genoscope GTC Sequencing Center Department of Genome Analysis, Institute of Molecular Biotechnology Beijing Genomics Institute/Human Genome Center Multimegabase Sequencing Center; Institute for Systems Biology Stanford Genome Technology Center The Stanford Human Genome Center and Department of Genetics University of Washington Genome Center Keio University University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas University of Oklahoma Advanced Center for Genome Technology Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics GBF ± German Research Centre for Biotechnology Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Lita Annenberg Hazen Genome Center Other Total Total human Finished human sequence (kb) sequence (kb) 1,196,888 970,789 765,898 377,998 345,125 203,166 85,995 71,357 49,865 42,865 31,241 29,728 28,162 24,115 17,364 11,670 10,071 7,650 4,639 4,338 59,574 4,338,224 46,560 284,353 175,279 78,486 53,418 16,971 48,808 7,014 17,788 6,297 9,676 3,530 9,121 14,692 13,058 7,028 9,155 2,940 2,338 2,104 35,911 842,027

We then set out to assemble the sequences from the individual largeinsert clones into an integrated draft sequence of the human genome. The assembly process had to resolve problems arising from the draft nature of much of the sequence, from the variety of clone sources, and from the high fraction of repeated sequences in the human genome. This process involved three steps: ®ltering, layout and merging. The entire data set was ®ltered uniformly to eliminate contamination from nonhuman sequences and other artefacts that had not already been removed by the individual centres. (Information about contamination was also sent back to the centres, which are updating the individual entries in the public databases.) We also identi®ed instances in which the sequence data from one BAC clone was substantially contaminated with sequence data from another (human or nonhuman) clone. The problems were resolved in most instances; 231 clones remained unresolved, and these were eliminated from the assembly reported here. Instances of lower levels of cross-contamination (for example, a single 96-well microplate misassigned to the wrong BAC) are more dif®cult to detect; some undoubtedly remain and may give rise to small spurious sequence contigs in the draft genome sequence. Such issues are readily resolved as the clones progress towards ®nished sequence, but they necessitate some caution in certain applications of the current data. The sequenced clones were then associated with speci®c clones on the physical map to produce a `layout'. In principle, sequenced clones that correspond to ®ngerprinted BACs could be directly assigned by name to ®ngerprint clone contigs on the ®ngerprintbased physical map. In practice, however, laboratory mixups occasionally resulted in incorrect assignments. To eliminate such problems, sequenced clones were associated with the ®ngerprint clone contigs in the physical map by using the sequence data to calculate a
Table 4 Plasmid paired-end reads
Total reads deposited* Random-sheared Enzyme digest Total 3,227,685 2,539,222 5,766,907 Read pairs² 1,155,284 761,010 1,916,294 Size range of inserts (kb) 1.8±6 0.8±4.7

............................................................................................................................................................................. Total human sequence deposited in GenBank by members of the International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium, as of 8 October 2000.The amount of total sequence (®nished plus draft plus predraft) is shown in the second column and the amount of ®nished sequence is shown in the third column. Total sequence differs from totals in Tables 1 and 2 because of inclusion of padding characters and of some clones not used in assembly. HTGS, high throughput genome sequence. *These three centres produced an additional 2.4 Gb of raw plasmid paired-end reads (see Table 4), consisting of 0.99 Gb from Whitehead Institute, 0.66 Gb from The Sanger Centre and 0.75 Gb from Washington University.

............................................................................................................................................................................. The plasmid paired-end reads used a mixture of DNA from a set of 24 samples from the DNA Polymorphism Discovery Resource (http://locus.umdnj.edu/nigms/pdr.html). This set of 24 anonymous US residents contains samples from European-Americans, African-Americans, MexicanAmericans, Native Americans and Asian-Americans, although the ethnicities of the individual samples are not identi®ed. Informed consent to contribute samples to the DNA Polymorphism Discovery Resource was obtained from all 450 individuals who contributed samples. Samples from the European-American, African-American and Mexican-American individuals came from NHANES (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes.htm); individuals were recontacted to obtain their consent for the Resource project. New samples were obtained from Asian-Americans whose ancestry was from a variety of East and South Asian countries. New samples were also obtained for the Native Americans; tribal permission was obtained ®rst, and then individual consents. See http:// www.nhgri.nih.gov/Grant_info/Funding/RFA/discover_polymorphisms.html and ref. 98. *Re¯ects data deposited with and released by The SNP Consortium (see http://snp.cshl.org/data). ² Read pairs represents the number of cases in which sequence from both ends of a genomic cloned fragment was determined and used in this study as linking information.

868

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

articles
partial list of restriction fragments in silico and comparing that list with the experimental database of BAC ®ngerprints. The comparison was feasible because the experimental sizing of restriction fragments was highly accurate (to within 0.5±1.5% of the true size, for 95% of fragments from 600 to 12,000 base pairs (bp))84,85. Reliable matching scores could be obtained for 16,193 of the clones. The remaining sequenced clones could not be placed on the map by this method because they were too short, or they contained too many small initial sequence contigs to yield enough restriction fragments, or possibly because their sequences were not represented in the ®ngerprint database. An independent approach to placing sequenced clones on the physical map used the database of end sequences from ®ngerprinted BACs (Table 1). Sequenced clones could typically be reliably mapped if they contained multiple matches to BAC ends, with all corresponding to clones from a single genomic region (multiple matches were required as a safeguard against errors known to exist in the BAC end database and against repeated sequences). This approach provided useful placement information for 22,566 sequenced clones. Altogether, we could assign 25,403 sequenced clones to ®ngerprint clone contigs by combining in silico digestion and BAC end sequence match data. To place most of the remaining sequenced clones, we exploited information about sequence overlap or BACend paired links of these clones with already positioned clones. This left only a few, mostly small, sequenced clones that could not be placed (152 sequenced clones containing 5.5 Mb of sequence out of 29,298 sequenced clones containing more than 4,260 Mb of sequence); these are being localized by radiation hybrid mapping of STSs derived from their sequences. The ®ngerprint clone contigs were then mapped to chromosomal locations, using sequence matches to mapped STSs from four human radiation hybrid maps95,99,100, one YAC and radiation hybrid map29, and two genetic maps101,102, together with data from FISH86,90,103. The mapping was iteratively re®ned by comparing the order and orientation of the STSs in the ®ngerprint clone contigs and the various STS-based maps, to identify and re®ne discrepancies (Fig. 5). Small ®ngerprint clone contigs (, 1 Mb) were dif®cult to orient and, sometimes, to order using these methods. In all, 942 ®ngerprint clone contigs contained sequenced clones. (An additional 304 of the 1,246 ®ngerprint clone contigs did not contain sequenced clones, but these tended to be extremely small and together contain less than 1% of the mapped clones. About onethird have been targeted for sequencing. A few derive from the Y chromosome, for which the map was constructed separately89. Most of the remainder are fragments of other larger contigs or represent other artefacts. These are being eliminated in subsequent versions of the database.) Of these 942 contigs with sequenced clones, 852 (90%, containing 99.2% of the total sequence) were localized to speci®c chromosome locations in this way. An additional 51 ®ngerprint clone contigs, containing 0.5% of the sequence, could be assigned to a speci®c chromosome but not to a precise position.
a
B1
B2
B3
A3

a Chromosome
Y X 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 1

Map location

Genethon map Gene map Marshfield map YAC map

50

100 150 Chromosome 2

200

250

b Chromosome
Y X 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 1

Map location

Genethon map Gene map Marshfield map YAC map

50

100 150 Chromosome 2

200

250

Figure 5 Positions of markers on previous maps of the genome (the Genethon101 genetic map and Marsh®eld genetic map (http://research.marsh®eldclinic.org/genetics/ genotyping_service/mgsver2.htm), the GeneMap99 radiation hybrid map100, and the Whitehead YAC and radiation hybrid map29) plotted against their derived position on the draft sequence for chromosome 2. The horizontal units are Mb but the vertical units of each map vary (cM, cR and so on) and thus all were scaled so that the entire map spans the full vertical range. Markers that map to other chromosomes are shown in the chromosome lines at the top.The data sets generally follow the diagonal, indicating that order and orientation of the marker sets on the different maps largely agree (note that the two genetic maps are completely superimposed). In a, there are two segments (bars) that are inverted in an earlier version draft sequence relative to all the other maps. b, The same chromosome after the information was used to reorient those two segments.

b
B5
A2

c
end-to-end alignment : OK
B1

A1 A2 B3 A3 A4 B4 B5 B6 A5 B2

A1

A4
A5

B4
B6

alignment in middle only : not OK

d
A1 A2 B1 A3 B3 A4 B6A5 B2 B4 B5

Figure 6 The key steps (a±d) in assembling individual sequenced clones into the draft genome sequence. A1±A5 represent initial sequence contigs derived from shotgun sequencing of clone A, and B1±B6 are from clone B.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

869

articles
The remaining 39 contigs containing 0.3% of the sequence were not positioned at all. We then merged the sequences from overlapping sequenced clones (Fig. 6), using the computer program GigAssembler104. The program considers nearby sequenced clones, detects overlaps between the initial sequence contigs in these clones, merges the overlapping sequences and attempts to order and orient the sequence contigs. It begins by aligning the initial sequence contigs from one clone with those from other clones in the same ®ngerprint clone contig on the basis of length of alignment, per cent identity of the alignment, position in the sequenced clone layout and other factors. Alignments are limited to one end of each initial sequence contig for partially overlapping contigs or to both ends of an initial sequence contig contained entirely within another; this eliminates internal alignments that may re¯ect repeated sequence or possible misassembly (Fig. 6b). Beginning with the highest scoring pairs, initial sequence contigs are then integrated to produce `merged sequence contigs' (usually referred to simply as `sequence contigs'). The program re®nes the arrangement of the clones within the ®ngerprint clone contig on the basis of the extent of sequence overlap between them and then rebuilds the sequence contigs. Next, the program selects a sequence path through the sequence contigs (Fig. 6c). It tries to use the highest quality data by preferring longer initial sequence contigs and avoiding the ®rst and last 250 bases of initial sequence contigs where possible. Finally, it attempts to order and orient the sequence contigs by using additional information, including sequence data from paired-end plasmid and BAC reads, known messenger RNAs and ESTs, as well as additional linking information provided by centres. The sequence contigs are thereby linked together to create `sequence-contig scaffolds' (Fig. 6d). The process also joins overlapping sequenced clones into sequencedclone contigs and links sequenced-clone contigs to form sequencedclone-contig scaffolds. A ®ngerprint clone contig may contain several sequenced-clone contigs, because bridging clones remain to be sequenced. The assembly contained 4,884 sequenced-clone

Fingerprint clone contig Pick clones for sequencing A B

Sequenced-clone contig Sequenced-clone-contig scaffold Sequence to at least draft coverage Sequenced clone A Merge data Sequenced clone B Initial sequence contig Merged sequence contig Order and orient with mRNA, paired end reads, other information Sequence-contig scaffold

Figure 7 Levels of clone and sequence coverage. A `®ngerprint clone contig' is assembled by using the computer program FPC84,451 to analyse the restriction enzyme digestion patterns of many large-insert clones. Clones are then selected for sequencing to minimize overlap between adjacent clones. For a clone to be selected, all of its restriction enzyme fragments (except the two vector-insert junction fragments) must be shared with at least one of its neighbours on each side in the contig. Once these overlapping clones have been sequenced, the set is a `sequenced-clone contig'. When all selected clones from a ®ngerprint clone contig have been sequenced, the sequenced-clone contig will be the same as the ®ngerprint clone contig. Until then, a ®ngerprint clone contig may contain several sequenced-clone contigs. After individual clones (for example, A and B) have been sequenced to draft coverage and the clones have been mapped, the data are analysed by GigAssembler (Fig. 6), producing merged sequence contigs from initial sequence contigs, and linking these to form sequence-contig scaffolds (see Box 1).

Table 5 The draft genome sequence
Chromosome Finished clones All 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 X Y NA UL 826,441 50,851 46,909 22,350 15,914 37,973 75,312 94,845 14,538 18,401 16,889 13,162 32,156 16,818 58,989 2,739 22,987 29,881 5,128 28,481 54,217 33,824 33,786 77,630 18,169 2,434 2,056 Sequence from clones (kb) Draft clones 1,734,995 149,027 167,439 152,840 134,973 129,581 76,082 47,328 102,484 77,648 99,181 111,092 84,653 68,983 27,370 67,453 48,997 36,349 65,284 26,568 5,302 0 0 45,100 3,221 1,858 6,182 Pre-draft clones 131,476 12,356 7,210 11,057 17,261 2,160 6,696 4,047 7,236 10,864 11,066 4,352 7,651 7,136 565 3,211 1,143 6,600 2,352 369 976 0 0 4,941 363 844 1,020 Contigs containing ®nished clones 958,922 61,001 53,775 26,959 19,096 48,895 93,458 103,188 16,659 24,030 21,421 16,145 37,519 22,191 78,302 3,112 27,751 33,531 6,656 32,228 56,534 33,824 33,786 83,796 20,222 2,446 2,395 Sequence from contigs (kb) Deep coverage sequence contigs 840,815 78,773 81,569 79,649 66,165 61,387 28,204 14,434 47,198 42,653 54,054 65,147 43,995 38,319 3,267 34,758 20,892 14,671 40,947 7,188 1,065 0 0 14,056 333 122 1,969 Draft/predraft sequence contigs 893,175 72,461 86,214 79,638 82,887 59,431 36,428 28,597 60,400 40,230 51,662 47,314 42,946 32,429 5,355 35,533 24,484 24,628 25,160 16,003 2,896 0 0 29,820 1,198 2,568 4,894

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... The table presents summary statistics for the draft genome sequence over the entire genome and by individual chromosome. NA, clones that could not be placed into the sequenced clone layout. UL, clones that could be placed in the layout, but that could not reliably be placed on a chromosome. First three columns, data from ®nished clones, draft clones and predraft clones. The last three columns break the data down according to the type of sequence contig. Contigs containing ®nished clones represent sequence contigs that consist of ®nished sequence plus any (small) extensions from merged sequence contigs that arise from overlap with ¯anking draft clones. Deep coverage sequence contigs include sequence from two or more overlapping un®nished clones; they consist of roughly full shotgun coverage and thus are longer than the average un®nished sequence contig. Draft/predraft sequence contigs are all of the other sequence contigs in un®nished clones. Thus, the draft genome sequence consists of approximately one-third ®nished sequence, one-third deep coverage sequence and one-third draft/pre-draft coverage sequence. In all of the statistics, we count only nonoverlapping bases in the draft genome sequence.

870

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

articles
contigs in 942 ®ngerprint clone contigs. The hierarchy of contigs is summarized in Fig. 7. Initial sequence contigs are integrated to create merged sequence contigs, which are then linked to form sequence-contig scaffolds. These scaffolds reside within sequenced-clone contigs, which in turn reside within ®ngerprint clone contigs.
The draft genome sequence Quality assessment

The result of the assembly process is an integrated draft sequence of the human genome. Several features of the draft genome sequence are reported in Tables 5±7, including the proportion represented by ®nished, draft and predraft categories. The Tables also show the numbers and lengths of different types of contig, for each chromosome and for the genome as a whole. The contiguity of the draft genome sequence at each level is an important feature. Two commonly used statistics have signi®cant drawbacks for describing contiguity. The `average length' of a contig is de¯ated by the presence of many small contigs comprising only a small proportion of the genome, whereas the `length-weighted average length' is in¯ated by the presence of large segments of ®nished sequence. Instead, we chose to describe the contiguity as a property of the `typical' nucleotide. We used a statistic called the `N50 length', de®ned as the largest length L such that 50% of all nucleotides are contained in contigs of size at least L. The continuity of the draft genome sequence reported here and the effectiveness of assembly can be readily seen from the following: half of all nucleotides reside within an initial sequence contig of at least 21.7 kb, a sequence contig of at least 82 kb, a sequence-contig scaffold of at least 274 kb, a sequenced-clone contig of at least 826 kb and a ®ngerprint clone contig of at least 8.4 Mb (Tables 6, 7). The cumulative distributions for each of these measures of contiguity are shown in Fig. 8, in which the N50 values for each measure can be seen as the value at which the cumulative distributions cross 50%. We have also estimated the size of each chromosome, by estimating the gap sizes (see below) and the extent of missing heterochromatic sequence93,94,105±108 (Table 8). This is undoubtedly an oversimpli®cation and does not adequately take into account the sequence status of each chromosome. Nonetheless, it provides a useful way to relate the draft sequence to the chromosomes.
Table 6 Clone level contiguity of the draft genome sequence
Chromosome Sequenced-clone contigs Number All 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 X Y UL 4,884 453 348 409 384 385 292 224 292 143 179 224 196 128 54 123 159 138 137 159 42 5 11 325 27 47 N50 length (kb) 826 650 1,028 672 606 623 814 1.074 542 1,242 1,097 887 1,138 1,151 3,079 797 620 831 709 569 2,318 28,515 23,048 572 1,539 227

The draft genome sequence already covers the vast majority of the genome, but it remains an incomplete, intermediate product that is regularly updated as we work towards a complete ®nished sequence. The current version contains many gaps and errors. We therefore sought to evaluate the quality of various aspects of the current draft genome sequence, including the sequenced clones themselves, their assignment to a position in the ®ngerprint clone contigs, and the assembly of initial sequence contigs from the individual clones into sequence-contig scaffolds. Nucleotide accuracy is re¯ected in a PHRAP score assigned to each base in the draft genome sequence and available to users through the Genome Browsers (see below) and public database entries. A summary of these scores for the un®nished portion of the genome is shown in Table 9. About 91% of the un®nished draft genome sequence has an error rate of less than 1 per 10,000 bases (PHRAP score . 40), and about 96% has an error rate of less than 1 in 1,000 bases (PHRAP . 30). These values are based only on the quality scores for the bases in the sequenced clones; they do not re¯ect additional con®dence in the sequences that are represented in overlapping clones. The ®nished portion of the draft genome sequence has an error rate of less than 1 per 10,000 bases. Individual sequenced clones. We assessed the frequency of misassemblies, which can occur when the assembly program PHRAP joins two nonadjacent regions in the clone into a single initial sequence contig. The frequency of misassemblies depends heavily on the depth and quality of coverage of each clone and the nature of the underlying sequence; thus it may vary among genomic regions and among individual centres. Most clone misassemblies are readily corrected as coverage is added during ®nishing, but they may have been propagated into the current version of the draft genome sequence and they justify caution for certain applications. We estimated the frequency of misassembly by examining instances in which there was substantial overlap between a draft clone and a ®nished clone. We studied 83 Mb of such overlaps, involving about 9,000 initial sequence contigs. We found 5.3 instances per Mb in which the alignment of an initial sequence contig to the ®nished sequence failed to extend to within 200 bases

Sequenced-clone-contig scaffolds Number 2,191 197 127 201 163 164 98 86 115 78 105 89 76 56 27 56 92 58 47 79 20 5 11 181 20 40 N50 length (kb) 2,279 1,915 3,140 1,550 1,659 1,642 3,292 3,527 1,742 2,411 1,952 3,024 2,717 3,257 8,489 2,095 1,317 2,138 2,572 1,200 6,862 28,515 23,048 1,082 3,290 281

Fingerprint clone contigs with sequence Number 942 106 52 73 41 48 17 29 43 21 16 31 28 13 14 19 57 43 24 51 9 5 11 143 8 40 N50 length (kb) 8,398 3,537 10,628 5,077 6,918 5,747 24,680 20,401 6,236 29,108 30,284 9,414 9,546 25,256 22,128 8,274 2,716 2,816 4,887 1,534 23,489 28,515 23,048 1,436 5,135 281

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... Number and size of sequenced-clone contigs, sequenced-clone-contig scaffolds and those ®ngerprint clone contigs (see Box 1) that contain sequenced clones; some small ®ngerprint clone contigs do not as yet have associated sequence. UL, ®ngerprint clone contigs that could not reliably be placed on a chromosome. These length estimates are from the draft genome sequence, in which gaps between sequence contigs are arbitrarily represented with 100 Ns and gaps between sequence clone contigs with 50,000 Ns for `bridged gaps' and 100,000 Ns for `unbridged gaps'. These arbitrary values differ minimally from empirical estimates of gap size (see text), and using the empirically derived estimates would change the N50 lengths presented here only slightly. For un®nished chromosomes, the N50 length ranges from 1.5 to 3 times the arithmetic mean for sequenced-clone contigs, 1.5 to 3 times for sequenced-clone-contig scaffolds, and 1.5 to 6 times for ®ngerprint clone contigs with sequence.

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

871

articles
of the end of the contig, suggesting a possible false join in the assembly of the initial sequence contig. In about half of these cases, the potential misassembly involved fewer than 400 bases, suggesting that a single raw sequence read may have been incorrectly joined. We found 1.9 instances per Mb in which the alignment showed an internal gap, again suggesting a possible misassembly; and 0.5 instances per Mb in which the alignment indicated that two initial sequence contigs that overlapped by at least 150 bp had not been merged by PHRAP. Finally, there were another 0.9 instances per Mb with various other problems. This gives a total of 8.6 instances per Mb of possible misassembly, with about half being relatively small issues involving a few hundred bases. Some of the potential problems might not result from misassembly, but might re¯ect sequence polymorphism in the population,
a 100
90 80 Cumulative percentage 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 4,500 5,000 Size (kb) Clone level continuity
Sequenced clones Sequenced-clone contigs Sequenced-clone-contig scaffolds Fingerprint clone contigs

small rearrangements during growth of the large-insert clones, regions of low-quality sequence or matches between segmental duplications. Thus, the frequency of misassemblies may be overstated. On the other hand, the criteria for recognizing overlap between draft and ®nished clones may have eliminated some misassemblies. Layout of the sequenced clones. We assessed the accuracy of the layout of sequenced clones onto the ®ngerprinted clone contigs by calculating the concordance between the positions assigned to a sequenced clone on the basis of in silico digestion and the position assigned on the basis of BAC end sequence data. The positions agreed in 98% of cases in which independent assignments could be made by both methods. The results were also compared with well studied regions containing both ®nished and draft genome sequence. These results indicated that sequenced clone order in the ®ngerprint map was reliable to within about half of one clone length (,100 kb). A direct test of the layout is also provided by the draft genome sequence assembly itself. With extensive coverage of the genome, a correctly placed clone should usually (although not always) show sequence overlap with its neighbours in the map. We found only 421 instances of `singleton' clones that failed to overlap a neighbouring clone. Close examination of the data suggests that most of these are correctly placed, but simply do not yet overlap an adjacent sequenced clone. About 150 clones appeared to be candidates for being incorrectly placed. Alignment of the ®ngerprint clone contigs. The alignment of the ®ngerprint clone contigs with the chromosomes was based on the radiation hybrid, YAC and genetic maps of STSs. The positions of most of the STSs in the draft genome sequence were consistent with these previous maps, but the positions of about 1.7% differed from one or more of them. Some of these disagreements may be due to errors in the layout of the sequenced clones or in the underlying
Figure 9 Overview of features of draft human genome. The Figure shows the Q occurrences of twelve important types of feature across the human genome. Large grey blocks represent centromeres and centromeric heterochromatin (size not precisely to scale). Each of the feature types is depicted in a track, from top to bottom as follows. (1) Chromosome position in Mb. (2) The approximate positions of Giemsa-stained chromosome bands at the 800 band resolution. (3) Level of coverage in the draft genome sequence. Red, areas covered by ®nished clones; yellow, areas covered by predraft sequence. Regions covered by draft sequenced clones are in orange, with darker shades re¯ecting increasing shotgun sequence coverage. (4) GC content. Percentage of bases in a 20,000 base window that are C or G. (5) Repeat density. Red line, density of SINE class repeats in a 100,000-base window; blue line, density of LINE class repeats in a 100,000base window. (6) Density of SNPs in a 50,000-base window. The SNPs were detected by sequencing and alignments of random genomic reads. Some of the heterogeneity in SNP density re¯ects the methods used for SNP discovery. Rigorous analysis of SNP density requires comparing the number of SNPs identi®ed to the precise number of bases surveyed. (7) Non-coding RNA genes. Brown, functional RNA genes such as tRNAs, snoRNAs and rRNAs; light orange, RNA pseudogenes. (8) CpG islands. Green ticks represent regions of , 200 bases with CpG levels signi®cantly higher than in the genome as a whole, and GC ratios of at least 50%. (9) Exo®sh ecores. Regions of homology with the puffer®sh T. nigroviridis 292 are blue. (10) ESTs with at least one intron when aligned against genomic DNA are shown as black tick marks. (11) The starts of genes predicted by Genie or Ensembl are shown as red ticks. The starts of known genes from the RefSeq database110 are shown in blue. (12) The names of genes that have been uniquely located in the draft genome sequence, characterized and named by the HGM Nomenclature Committee. Known disease genes from the OMIM database are red, other genes blue. This Figure is based on an earlier version of the draft genome sequence than analysed in the text, owing to production constraints. We are aware of various errors in the Figure, including omissions of some known genes and misplacements of others. Some genes are mapped to more than one location, owing to errors in assembly, close paralogues or pseudogenes. Manual review was performed to select the most likely location in these cases and to correct other regions. For updated information, see http://genome.ucsc.edu/ and http://www.ensembl.org/.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

b 100
90 80 Cumulative percentage 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 0 100 200 300 400
Initial sequence contigs Sequence contigs Sequence-contig scaffolds

500 600 700 Size (kb) Sequence level continuity

800

900 1,000

Figure 8 Cumulative distributions of several measures of clone level contiguity and sequence contiguity. The ®gures represent the proportion of the draft genome sequence contained in contigs of at most the indicated size. a, Clone level contiguity. The clones have a tight size distribution with an N50 of , 160 kb (corresponding to 50% on the cumulative distribution). Sequenced-clone contigs represent the next level of continuity, and are linked by mRNA sequences or pairs of BAC end sequences to yield the sequenced-clone-contig scaffolds. The underlying contiguity of the layout of sequenced clones against the ®ngerprinted clone contigs is only partially shown at this scale. b, Sequence contiguity. The input fragments have low continuity (N50 = 21.7 kb). After merging, the sequence contigs grow to an N50 length of about 82 kb. After linking, sequence-contig scaffolds with an N50 length of about 274 kb are created.
872

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
Table 7 Sequence level contiguity of the draft genome sequence
Chromosome Initial sequence contigs Number All 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 X Y UL 396,913 37,656 32,280 38,848 28,600 30,096 17,472 12,733 19,042 15,955 21,762 29,723 22,050 13,737 4,470 13,134 10,297 10,369 16,266 6,009 2,884 103 526 11,062 557 1,282 N50 length (kb) 21.7 16.5 19.9 15.6 16.0 20.4 43.6 86.4 18.1 20.1 18.7 14.3 19.1 21.7 161.4 15.3 34.4 22.9 15.3 38.4 108.6 340.0 113.9 58.8 154.3 21.4 Number 149,821 12,256 13,228 15,098 13,152 10,689 5,547 4,562 8,984 6,226 9,126 8,503 8,422 5,193 829 5,840 4,916 4,339 4,461 2,503 511 5 11 4,607 140 613 Sequence contigs N50 length (kb) 81.9 59.1 57.3 37.7 33.0 72.9 180.3 335.7 38.2 55.6 47.9 40.0 63.4 70.5 1,371.0 30.3 119.5 90.6 51.4 134.4 1,346.7 28,515.3 23,048.1 218.6 1,388.6 46.0 Sequence-contig scaffolds Number 87,757 5,457 6,959 8,964 7,402 6,378 2,554 2,726 4,631 3,766 6,886 4,684 5,526 2,659 541 3,229 3,337 2,616 2,540 1,551 312 5 11 2,610 106 297 N50 length (kb) 274.3 278.4 248.5 167.4 158.9 241.2 485.0 591.3 198.9 216.2 133.0 193.2 217.0 300.1 2,009.5 149.7 356.3 248.9 216.1 375.5 813.8 28,515.3 23,048.1 450.7 1,439.7 166.4

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... This Table is similar to Table 6 but shows the number and N50 length for various types of sequence contig (see Box 1). See legend to Table 6 concerning treatment of gaps. For sequence contigs in the draft genome sequence, the N50 length ranges from 1.7 to 5.5 times the arithmetic mean for initial sequence contigs, 2.5 to 8.2 times for merged sequence contigs, and 6.1 to 10 times for sequence-contig scaffolds.

Table 8 Chromosome size estimates
Chromosome* Sequenced bases² (Mb) FCC gaps³ SCC gapsk Sequence gaps# Heterochromatin and short arm adjustments**(Mb) Total estimated chromosome size (including artefactual duplication in draft genome sequence)²² (Mb) Previously estimated chromosome size³³ (Mb)

Number All 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 X Y NA UL 2,692.9 212.2 221.6 186.2 168.1 169.7 158.1 146.2 124.3 106.9 127.1 128.6 124.5 92.9 86.9 73.4 73.1 72.8 72.9 55.4 60.5 33.8 33.8 127.7 21.8 5.1 9.3 897 104 50 71 39 46 15 27 41 19 14 29 26 12 13 18 55 41 22 49 7 4 10 141 6 0 38

Total bases in gaps§ (Mb) 152.0 17.7 8.5 12.1 6.6 7.8 2.6 4.6 7.0 3.2 2.4 4.9 4.4 2.0 2.2 3.1 9.4 7.0 3.7 8.3 1.2 0.1 1.0 24.0 1.0 0 0

Number 4,076 347 296 336 343 337 275 195 249 122 163 193 168 115 40 104 102 95 113 108 33 0 0 182 19 134 7

Total bases in gaps¶ (Mb) 142.7 12.1 10.4 11.8 12.0 11.8 9.6 6.8 8.7 4.3 5.7 6.8 5.9 4.0 1.4 3.6 3.6 3.3 4.0 3.8 1.2 0.0 0.0 6.4 0.7 0.0 0.0

Number 145,514 11,803 12,880 14,689 12,768 10,304 5,225 4,338 8,692 6,083 8,947 8,279 8,226 5,065 775 5,717 4,757 4,261 4,324 2,344 469 0 0 4,282 113 577 566

Total bases in gapsI (Mb) 80.6 6.5 7.1 8.1 7.1 5.7 2.9 2.4 4.8 3.4 5.0 4.6 4.6 2.8 0.4 3.2 2.6 2.4 2.4 1.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 2.4 0.1 0.3 0.3 212 30 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 22 3 3 3 16 16 17 15 3 3 3 3 11 13 3 27 0 0

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... * NA, sequenced clones that could not be associated with ®ngerprint clone contigs. UL, clone contigs that could not be reliably placed on a chromosome. ² Total number of bases in the draft genome sequence, excluding gaps. Total length of scaffold (including gaps contained within clones) is 2.916 Gb. ³ Gaps between those ®ngerprint clone contigs that contain sequenced clones excluding gaps for centromeres. § For un®nished chromosomes, we estimate an average size of 0.17 Mb per FCC gap, based on retrospective estimates of the clone coverage of chromosomes 21 and 22. Gap estimates for chromosomes 21 and 22 are taken from refs 93, 94. k Gaps between sequenced-clone contigs within a ®ngerprint clone contig. ¶ For un®nished chromosomes, we estimate sequenced clone gaps at 0.035 Mb each, based on evaluation of a sample of these gaps. # Gaps between two sequence contigs within a sequenced-clone contig. I We estimate the average number of bases in sequence gaps from alignments of the initial sequence contigs of un®nished clones (see text) and extrapolation to the whole chromosome. ** Including adjustments for estimates of the sizes of the short arms of the acrocentric chromosomes 13, 14, 15, 21 and 22 (ref. 105), estimates for the centromere and heterochromatic regions of chromosomes 1, 9 and 16 (refs 106, 107) and estimates of 3 Mb for the centromere and 24 Mb for telomeric heterochromatin for the Y chromosome108. ²² The sum of the ®ve lengths in the preceding columns. This is an overestimate, because the draft genome sequence contains some artefactual sequence owing to inability to correctly to merge all underlying sequence contigs. The total amount of artefactual duplication varies among chromosomes; the overall amount is estimated by computational analysis to be about 100 Mb, or about 3% of the total length given, yielding a total estimated size of about 3,200 Mb for the human genome. ³³ Including heterochromatic regions and acrocentric short arm(s)105.

3,289 279 251 221 197 198 176 163 148 140 143 148 142 118 107 100 104 88 86 72 66 45 48 163 51 0 0

3,286 263 255 214 203 194 183 171 155 145 144 144 143 114 109 106 98 92 85 67 72 50 56 164 59 0 0

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

873

articles
®ngerprint map. However, many involve STSs that have been localized on only one or two of the previous maps or that occur as isolated discrepancies in con¯ict with several ¯anking STSs. Many of these cases are probably due to errors in the previous maps (with error rates for individual maps estimated at 1±2%100). Others may be due to incorrect assignment of the STSs to the draft genome sequence (by the electronic polymerase chain reaction (e-PCR) computer program) or to database entries that contain sequence data from more than one clone (owing to crosscontamination). Graphical views of the independent data sets were particularly useful in detecting problems with order or orientation (Fig. 5). Areas of con¯ict were reviewed and corrected if supported by the underlying data. In the version discussed here, there were 41 sequenced clones falling in 14 sequenced-clone contigs with STS content information from multiple maps that disagreed with the ¯anking clones or sequenced-clone contigs; the placement of these clones thus remains suspect. Four of these instances suggest errors in the ®ngerprint map, whereas the others suggest errors in the layout of sequenced clones. These cases are being investigated and will be corrected in future versions. Assembly of the sequenced clones. We assessed the accuracy of the assembly by using a set of 148 draft clones comprising 22.4 Mb for which ®nished sequence subsequently became available104. The initial sequence contigs lack information about order and orientation, and GigAssembler attempts to use linking data to infer such information as far as possible104. Starting with initial sequence contigs that were unordered and unoriented, the program placed 90% of the initial sequence contigs in the correct orientation and 85% in the correct order with respect to one another. In a separate test, GigAssembler was tested on simulated draft data produced from ®nished sequence on chromosome 22 and similar results were obtained. Some problems remain at all levels. First, errors in the initial sequence contigs persist in the merged sequence contigs built from them and can cause dif®culties in the assembly of the draft genome sequence. Second, GigAssembler may fail to merge some overlapping sequences because of poor data quality, allelic differences or misassemblies of the initial sequence contigs; this may result in apparent local duplication of a sequence. We have estimated by various methods the amount of such artefactual duplication in the assembly from these and other sources to be about 100 Mb. On the other hand, nearby duplicated sequences may occasionally be incorrectly merged. Some sequenced clones remain incorrectly placed on the layout, as discussed above, and others (, 0.5%) remain unplaced. The ®ngerprint map has undoubtedly failed to resolve some closely related duplicated regions, such as the Williams region and several highly repetitive subtelomeric and pericentric regions (see below). Detailed examination and sequence ®nishing may be required to sort out these regions precisely, as has been done with chromosome Y89. Finally, small sequenced-clone contigs with limited or no STS
Table 9 Distribution of PHRAP scores in the draft genome sequence
PHRAP score 0±9 10±19 20±29 30±39 40±49 50±59 60±69 70±79 80±89 .90 Percentage of bases in the draft genome sequence 0.6 1.3 2.2 4.8 8.1 8.7 9.0 12.1 17.3 35.9

............................................................................................................................................................................. PHRAP scores are a logarithmically based representation of the error probability. A PHRAP score of X corresponds to an error probability of 10-X/10. Thus, PHRAP scores of 20, 30 and 40 correspond to accuracy of 99%, 99.9% and 99.99%, respectively. PHRAP scores are derived from quality scores of the underlying sequence reads used in sequence assembly. See http://www.genome. washington.edu/UWGC/analysistools/phrap.htm.

landmark content remain dif®cult to place. Full utilization of the higher resolution radiation hybrid map (the TNG map) may help in this95. Future targeted FISH experiments and increased map continuity will also facilitate positioning of these sequences. Genome coverage We next assessed the nature of the gaps within the draft genome sequence, and attempted to estimate the fraction of the human genome not represented within the current version. Gaps in draft genome sequence coverage. There are three types of gap in the draft genome sequence: gaps within un®nished sequenced clones; gaps between sequenced-clone contigs, but within ®ngerprint clone contigs; and gaps between ®ngerprint clone contigs. The ®rst two types are relatively straightforward to close simply by performing additional sequencing and ®nishing on already identi®ed clones. Closing the third type may require screening of additional large-insert clone libraries and possibly new technologies for the most recalcitrant regions. We consider these three cases in turn. We estimated the size of gaps within draft clones by studying instances in which there was substantial overlap between a draft clone and a ®nished clone, as described above. The average gap size in these draft sequenced clones was 554 bp, although the precise estimate was sensitive to certain assumptions in the analysis. Assuming that the sequence gaps in the draft genome sequence are fairly represented by this sample, about 80 Mb or about 3% (likely range 2±4%) of sequence may lie in the 145,514 gaps within draft sequenced clones. The gaps between sequenced-clone contigs but within ®ngerprint clone contigs are more dif®cult to evaluate directly, because the draft genome sequence ¯anking many of the gaps is often not precisely aligned with the ®ngerprinted clones. However, most are much smaller than a single BAC. In fact, nearly three-quarters of these gaps are bridged by one or more individual BACs, as indicated by linking information from BAC end sequences. We measured the sizes of a subset of gaps directly by examining restriction fragment ®ngerprints of overlapping clones. A study of 157 `bridged' gaps and 55 `unbridged' gaps gave an average gap size of 25 kb. Allowing for the possibility that these gaps may not be fully representative and that some restriction fragments are not included in the calculation, a more conservative estimate of gap size would be 35 kb. This would indicate that about 150 Mb or 5% of the human genome may reside in the 4,076 gaps between sequenced-clone contigs. This sequence should be readily obtained as the clones spanning them are sequenced. The size of the gaps between ®ngerprint clone contigs was estimated by comparing the ®ngerprint maps to the essentially completed chromosomes 21 and 22. The analysis shows that the ®ngerprinted BAC clones in the global database cover 97±98% of the sequenced portions of those chromosomes86. The published sequences of these chromosomes also contain a few small gaps (5 and 11, respectively) amounting to some 1.6% of the euchromatic sequence, and do not include the heterochromatic portion. This suggests that the gaps between contigs in the ®ngerprint map contain about 4% of the euchromatic genome. Experience with closure of such gaps on chromosomes 20 and 7 suggests that many of these gaps are less than one clone in length and will be closed by clones from other libraries. However, recovery of sequence from these gaps represents the most challenging aspect of producing a complete ®nished sequence of the human genome. As another measure of the representation of the BAC libraries, Riethman109 has found BAC or cosmid clones that link to telomeric half-YACs or to the telomeric sequence itself for 40 of the 41 nonsatellite telomeres. Thus, the ®ngerprint map appears to have no substantial gaps in these regions. Many of the pericentric regions are also represented, but analysis is less complete here (see below). Representation of random raw sequences. In another approach to measuring coverage, we compared a collection of random raw sequence reads to the existing draft genome sequence. In principle,
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

874

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
the fraction of reads matching the draft genome sequence should provide an estimate of genome coverage. In practice, the comparison is complicated by the need to allow for repeat sequences, the imperfect sequence quality of both the raw sequence and the draft genome sequence, and the possibility of polymorphism. Nonetheless, the analysis provides a reasonable view of the extent to which the genome is represented in the draft genome sequence and the public databases. We compared the raw sequence reads against both the sequences used in the construction of the draft genome sequence and all of GenBank using the BLAST computer program. Of the 5,615 raw sequence reads analysed (each containing at least 100 bp of contiguous non-repetitive sequence), 4,924 had a match of $ 97% identity with a sequenced clone, indicating that 88 6 1.5% of the genome was represented in sequenced clones. The estimate is subject to various uncertainties. Most serious is the proportion of repeat sequence in the remainder of the genome. If the unsequenced portion of the genome is unusually rich in repeated sequence, we would underestimate its size (although the excess would be comprised of repeated sequence). We examined those raw sequences that failed to match by comparing them to the other publicly available sequence resources. Fifty (0.9%) had matches in public databases containing cDNA sequences, STSs and similar data. An additional 276 (or 43% of the remaining raw sequence) had matches to the whole-genome shotgun reads discussed above (consistent with the idea that these reads cover about half of the genome). We also examined the extent of genome coverage by aligning the cDNA sequences for genes in the RefSeq dataset110 to the draft genome sequence. We found that 88% of the bases of these cDNAs could be aligned to the draft genome sequence at high stringency (at least 98% identity). (A few of the alignments with either the random raw sequence reads or the cDNAs may be to a highly similar region in the genome, but such matches should affect the estimate of genome coverage by considerably less than 1%, based on the estimated extent of duplication within the genome (see below).) These results indicate that about 88% of the human genome is represented in the draft genome sequence and about 94% in the combined publicly available sequence databases. The ®gure of 88% agrees well with our independent estimates above that about 3%, 5% and 4% of the genome reside in the three types of gap in the draft genome sequence. Finally, a small experimental check was performed by screening a large-insert clone library with probes corresponding to 16 of the whole genome shotgun reads that failed to match the draft genome sequence. Five hybridized to many clones from different ®ngerprint clone contigs and were discarded as being repetitive. Of the remaining eleven, two fell within sequenced clones (presumably within sequence gaps of the ®rst type), eight fell in ®ngerprint clone contigs but between sequenced clones (gaps of the second type) and one failed to identify clones in the ®ngerprint map (gaps of the third type) but did identify clones in another large-insert library. Although these numbers are small, they are consistent with the view that the much of the remaining genome sequence lies within already identi®ed clones in the current map. Estimates of genome and chromosome sizes. Informed by this analysis of genome coverage, we proceeded to estimate the sizes of the genome and each of the chromosomes (Table 8). Beginning with the current assigned sequence for each chromosome, we corrected for the known gaps on the basis of their estimated sizes (see above). We attempted to account for the sizes of centromeres and heterochromatin, neither of which are well represented in the draft sequence. Finally, we corrected for around 100 Mb of artefactual duplication in the assembly. We arrived at a total human genome size estimate of around 3,200 Mb, which compares favourably with previous estimates based on DNA content. We also independently estimated the size of the euchromatic portion of the genome by determining the fraction of the 5,615 random raw sequences that matched the ®nished portion of the human genome (whose total length is known with greater precision). Twenty-nine per cent of these raw sequences found a match among 835 Mb of nonredundant ®nished sequence. This leads to an estimate of the euchromatic genome size of 2.9 Gb. This agrees reasonably with the prediction above based on the length of the draft genome sequence (Table 8). Update. The results above re¯ect the data on 7 October 2000. New data are continually being added, with improvements being made to the physical map, new clones being sequenced to close gaps and draft clones progressing to full shotgun coverage and ®nishing. The draft genome sequence will be regularly reassembled and publicly released. Currently, the physical map has been re®ned such that the number of ®ngerprint clone contigs has fallen from 1,246 to 965; this re¯ects the elimination of some artefactual contigs and the closure of some gaps. The sequence coverage has risen such that 90% of the human genome is now represented in the sequenced clones and more than 94% is represented in the combined publicly available sequence databases. The total amount of ®nished sequence is now around 1 Gb.

Broad genomic landscape
What biological insights can be gleaned from the draft sequence? In this section, we consider very large-scale features of the draft genome sequence: the distribution of GC content, CpG islands and recombination rates, and the repeat content and gene content of the human genome. The draft genome sequence makes it possible to integrate these features and others at scales ranging from individual

Figure 10 Screen shot from UCSC Draft Human Genome Browser. See http://genome.ucsc.edu/.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

Figure 11 Screen shot from the Genome Browser of Project Ensembl. See http://www.ensembl.org.
875

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
nucleotides to collections of chromosomes. Unless noted, all analyses were conducted on the assembled draft genome sequence described above. Figure 9 provides a high-level view of the contents of the draft genome sequence, at a scale of about 3.8 Mb per centimetre. Of course, navigating information spanning nearly ten orders of magnitude requires computational tools to extract the full value. We have created and made freely available various `Genome Browsers'. Browsers were developed and are maintained by the University of California at Santa Cruz (Fig. 10) and the EnsEMBL project of the European Bioinformatics Institute and the Sanger Centre (Fig. 11). Additional browsers have been created; URLs are listed at www.nhgri.nih.gov/genome_hub. These web-based computer tools allow users to view an annotated display of the draft genome sequence, with the ability to scroll along the chromosomes and zoom in or out to different scales. They include: the nucleotide sequence, sequence contigs, clone contigs, sequence coverage and ®nishing status, local GC content, CpG islands, known STS markers from previous genetic and physical maps, families of repeat sequences, known genes, ESTs and mRNAs, predicted genes, SNPs and sequence similarities with other organisms (currently the puffer®sh Tetraodon nigroviridis). These browsers will be updated as the draft genome sequence is re®ned and corrected as additional annotations are developed. In addition to using the Genome Browsers, one can download
Box 2 Sources of publicly available sequence data and other relevant genomic information
http://genome.ucsc.edu/ University of California at Santa Cruz Contains the assembly of the draft genome sequence used in this paper and updates http://genome.wustl.edu/gsc/ human/Mapping/ Washington University Contains links to clone and accession maps of the human genome http://www.ensembl.org EBI/Sanger Centre Allows access to DNA and protein sequences with automatic baseline annotation http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ genome/guide/ NCBI Views of chromosomes and maps and loci with links to other NCBI resources http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ genemap99/ Gene map 99: contains data and viewers for radiation hybrid maps of EST-based STSs http://compbio.ornl.gov/channel/index.html Oak Ridge National Laboratory

from these sites the entire draft genome sequence together with the annotations in a computer-readable format. The sequences of the underlying sequenced clones are all available through the public sequence databases. URLs for these and other genome websites are listed in Box 2. A larger list of useful URLs can be found at www.nhgri.nih.gov/genome_hub. An introduction to using the draft genome sequence, as well as associated databases and analytical tools, is provided in an accompanying paper111. In addition, the human cytogenetic map has been integrated with the draft genome sequence as part of a related project. The BAC Resource Consortium103 established dense connections between the maps using more than 7,500 sequenced large-insert clones that had been cytogenetically mapped by FISH; the average density of the map is 2.3 clones per Mb. Although the precision of the integration is limited by the resolution of FISH, the links provide a powerful tool for the analysis of cytogenetic aberrations in inherited diseases and cancer. These cytogenetic links can also be accessed through the Genome Browsers.
Long-range variation in GC content

The existence of GC-rich and GC-poor regions in the human genome was ®rst revealed by experimental studies involving density gradient separation, which indicated substantial variation in average GC content among large fragments. Subsequent studies have indicated that these GC-rich and GC-poor regions may have different biological properties, such as gene density, composition of repeat sequences, correspondence with cytogenetic bands and recombination rate112±117. Many of these studies were indirect, owing to the lack of suf®cient sequence data. The draft genome sequence makes it possible to explore the variation in GC content in a direct and global manner. Visual inspection (Fig. 9) con®rms that local GC content undergoes substantial long-range excursions from its genome-wide average of 41%. If the genome were drawn from a uniform distribution of GC content, the local GC content in a window of size n bp should be 41 6 Î((41)(59)/n)%. Fluctuations would be modest, with the standard deviation being halved as the window size is quadrupledÐ for example, 0.70%, 0.35%, 0.17% and 0.09% for windows of size 5, 20, 80 and 320 kb. The draft genome sequence, however, contains many regions with much more extreme variation. There are huge regions (. 10 Mb) with GC content far from the average. For example, the most distal 48 Mb of chromosome 1p (from the telomere to about STS marker D1S3279) has an average GC content of 47.1%, and chromosome 13 has a 40-Mb region (roughly between STS marker A005X38 and

12,000

10,000 Number of 20-kb windows

Java viewers for human genome data http://hgrep.ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp/ RIKEN and the University of Tokyo Gives an overview of the entire human genome structure http://snp.cshl.org/ The SNP Consortium Includes a variety of ways to query for SNPs in the human genome http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/ Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man Contain information about human genes and disease http://www.nhgri.nih.gov/ELSI/ and http://www.ornl.gov/hgmis/elsi/elsi.html NHGRI and DOE Contains information, links and articles on a wide range of social, ethical and legal issues

8,000

6,000

4,000

2,000

0 20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

GC content

Figure 12 Histogram of GC content of 20-kb windows in the draft genome sequence.
© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

876

articles
60%50%40%30%20%60%50%40%30%20%60%50%40%30%20%-

0 Mb

50 Mb

100 Mb

0 Mb

5 Mb

10 Mb

0 Mb

0.5 Mb

1 Mb

Figure 13 Variation in GC content at various scales. The GC content in subregions of a 100-Mb region of chromosome 1 is plotted, starting at about 83 Mb from the beginning of the draft genome sequence. This region is AT-rich overall. Top, the GC content of the

entire 100-Mb region analysed in non-overlapping 20-kb windows. Middle, GC content of the ®rst 10 Mb, analysed in 2-kb windows. Bottom, GC content of the ®rst 1 Mb, analysed in 200-bp windows. At this scale, gaps in the sequence can be seen.

stsG30423) with only 36% GC content. There are also examples of large shifts in GC content between adjacent multimegabase regions. For example, the average GC content on chromosome 17q is 50% for the distal 10.3 Mb but drops to 38% for the adjacent 3.9 Mb. There are regions of less than 300 kb with even wider swings in GC content, for example, from 33.1% to 59.3%. Long-range variation in GC content is evident not just from extreme outliers, but throughout the genome. The distribution of average GC content in 20-kb windows across the draft genome sequence is shown in Fig. 12. The spread is 15-fold larger than predicted by a uniform process. Moreover, the standard deviation barely decreases as window size increases by successive factors of fourÐ5.9%, 5.2%, 4.9% and 4.6% for windows of size 5, 20, 80 and 320 kb. The distribution is also notably skewed, with 58% below the average and 42% above the average of 41%, with a long tail of GCrich regions. Bernardi and colleagues118,119 proposed that the long-range variation in GC content may re¯ect that the genome is composed of a mosaic of compositionally homogeneous regions that they dubbed `isochores'. They suggested that the skewed distribution is composed of ®ve normal distributions, corresponding to ®ve distinct types of isochore (L1, L2, H1, H2 and H3, with GC contents of , 38%, 38±42%, 42±47%, 47±52% and . 52%, respectively). We studied the draft genome sequence to see whether strict isochores could be identi®ed. For example, the sequence was divided into 300-kb windows, and each window was subdivided into 20-kb subwindows. We calculated the average GC content for each window and subwindow, and investigated how much of the variance in the GC content of subwindows across the genome can be statistically `explained' by the average GC content in each window. About three-quarters of the genome-wide variance among 20-kb windows can be statistically explained by the average GC content of 300-kb windows that contain them, but the residual variance among subwindows (standard deviation, 2.4%) is still far too large to be consistent with a homogeneous distribution. In fact, the hypothesis of homogeneity could be rejected for each 300-kb window in the draft genome sequence. Similar results were obtained with other window and subwindow sizes. Some of the local heterogeneity in GC content is attributable to transposable element insertions (see below). Such repeat elements typically have a higher GC content than the surrounding sequence, with the effect being strongest for the most recent insertions. These results rule out a strict notion of isochores as compositionally homogeneous. Instead, there is substantial variation at many different scales, as illustrated in Fig. 13. Although isochores do not appear to merit the pre®x `iso', the genome clearly does contain large regions of distinctive GC content and it is likely to be
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

worth rede®ning the concept so that it becomes possible rigorously to partition the genome into regions. In the absence of a precise de®nition, we will loosely refer to such regions as `GC content domains' in the context of the discussion below. Fickett et al.120 have explored a model in which the underlying preference for a particular GC content drifts continuously throughout the genome, an approach that bears further examination. Churchill121 has proposed that the boundaries between GC content domains can in some cases be predicted by a hidden Markov model, with one state representing a GC-rich region and one representing an AT-rich region. We found that this approach tended to identify only very short domains of less than a kilobase (data not shown), but variants of this approach deserve further attention. The correlation between GC content domains and various biological properties is of great interest, and this is likely to be the most fruitful route to understanding the basis of variation in GC content. As described below, we con®rm the existence of strong correlations with both repeat content and gene density. Using the integration between the draft genome sequence and the cytogenetic map described above, it is possible to con®rm a statistically signi®cant correlation between GC content and Giemsa bands (Gbands). For example, 98% of large-insert clones mapping to the darkest G-bands are in 200-kb regions of low GC content (average 37%), whereas more than 80% of clones mapping to the lightest Gbands are in regions of high GC content (average 45%)103. Estimated band locations can be seen in Fig. 9 and viewed in the context of other genome annotation at http://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/ mapPlots/ and http://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hgTracks.html. CpG islands A related topic is the distribution of so-called CpG islands across the genome. The dinucleotide CpG is notable because it is greatly under-represented in human DNA, occurring at only about one®fth of the roughly 4% frequency that would be expected by simply multiplying the typical fraction of Cs and Gs (0.21 ´ 0.21). The de®cit occurs because most CpG dinucleotides are methylated on the cytosine base, and spontaneous deamination of methyl-C residues gives rise to T residues. (Spontaneous deamination of ordinary cytosine residues gives rise to uracil residues that are readily recognized and repaired by the cell.) As a result, methylCpG dinucleotides steadily mutate to TpG dinucleotides. However, the genome contains many `CpG islands' in which CpG dinucleotides are not methylated and occur at a frequency closer to that predicted by the local GC content. CpG islands are of particular interest because many are associated with the 59 ends of genes122±127. We searched the draft genome sequence for CpG islands. Ideally, they should be de®ned by directly testing for the absence of cytosine methylation, but that was not practical for this report. There are
877

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
Table 10 Number of CpG islands by GC content
GC content of island Total .80% 70±80% 60±70% 50±60% Number of islands 28,890 22 5,884 18,779 4,205 Percentage of islands 100 0.08 20 65 15 Nucleotides in islands 19,818,547 5,916 3,111,965 13,110,924 3,589,742 Percentage of nucleotides in islands 100 0.03 16 66 18

............................................................................................................................................................................. Potential CpG islands were identi®ed by searching the draft genome sequence one base at a time, scoring each dinucleotide (+17 for GC, -1 for others) and identifying maximally scoring segments. Each segment was then evaluated to determine GC content ($50%), length (.200) and ratio of observed proportion of GC dinucleotides to the expected proportion on the basis of the GC content of the segment (.0.60), using a modi®cation of a program developed by G. Micklem (personal communication).

unusually low 2.9 islands per Mb, and chromosomes 16, 17 and 22 have 19±22 islands per Mb. The extreme outlier is chromosome 19, with 43 islands per Mb. Similar trends are seen when considering the percentage of bases contained in CpG islands. The relative density of CpG islands correlates reasonably well with estimates of relative gene density on these chromosomes, based both on previous mapping studies involving ESTs (Fig. 14) and on the distribution of gene predictions discussed below.
Comparison of genetic and physical distance

25 Number of genes per Mb 20
22 17 19

Distance from centromere (cM)

various computer programs that attempt to identify CpG islands on the basis of primary sequence alone. These programs differ in some important respects (such as how aggressively they subdivide long CpG-containing regions), and the precise correspondence with experimentally undermethylated islands has not been validated. Nevertheless, there is a good correlation, and computational analysis thus provides a reasonable picture of the distribution of CpG islands in the genome. To identify CpG islands, we used the de®nition proposed by Gardiner-Garden and Frommer128 and embodied in a computer program. We searched the draft genome sequence for CpG islands, using both the full sequence and the sequence masked to eliminate repeat sequences. The number of regions satisfying the de®nition of a CpG island was 50,267 in the full sequence and 28,890 in the repeat-masked sequence. The difference re¯ects the fact that some repeat elements (notably Alu) are GC-rich. Although some of these repeat elements may function as control regions, it seems unlikely that most of the apparent CpG islands in repeat sequences are functional. Accordingly, we focused on those in the non-repeated sequence. The count of 28,890 CpG islands is reasonably close to the previous estimate of about 35,000 (ref. 129, as modi®ed by ref. 130). Most of the islands are short, with 60±70% GC content (Table 10). More than 95% of the islands are less than 1,800 bp long, and more than 75% are less than 850 bp. The longest CpG island (on chromosome 10) is 36,619 bp long, and 322 are longer than 3,000 bp. Some of the larger islands contain ribosomal pseudogenes, although RNA genes and pseudogenes account for only a small proportion of all islands (, 0.5%). The smaller islands are consistent with their previously hypothesized function, but the role of these larger islands is uncertain. The density of CpG islands varies substantially among some of the chromosomes. Most chromosomes have 5±15 islands per Mb, with a mean of 10.5 islands per Mb. However, chromosome Y has an

The draft genome sequence makes it possible to compare genetic and physical distances and thereby to explore variation in the rate of recombination across the human chromosomes. We focus here on large-scale variation. Finer variation is examined in an accompanying paper131. The genetic and physical maps are integrated by 5,282 polymorphic loci from the Marsh®eld genetic map102, whose positions are known in terms of centimorgans (cM) and Mb along the chromosomes. Figure 15 shows the comparison of the draft genome sequence for chromosome 12 with the male, female and sex-averaged maps. One can calculate the approximate ratio of cM per Mb across a chromosome (re¯ected in the slopes in Fig. 15) and the average recombination rate for each chromosome arm. Two striking features emerge from analysis of these data. First, the average recombination rate increases as the length of the chromosome arm decreases (Fig. 16). Long chromosome arms have an average recombination rate of about 1 cM per Mb, whereas the shortest arms are in the range of 2 cM per Mb. A similar trend has been seen in the yeast genome132,133, despite the fact that the physical scale is nearly 200 times as small. Moreover, experimental studies have shown that lengthening or shortening yeast chromosomes results in a compensatory change in recombination rate132. The second observation is that the recombination rate tends to be suppressed near the centromeres and higher in the distal portions of most chromosomes, with the increase largely in the terminal

140 130 120 110 100 90 12q 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 10 20 12p 30 40 50 60

15 10 5 0 0

1 11 15 14 6 9 12 20 3 7 10 2 4 8 5 21 13 18 X

16

Sex-averaged Male Female 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 Centromere Position (Mb)

10

20 30 Number of CpG islands per Mb

40

50

Figure 14 Number of CpG islands per Mb for each chromosome, plotted against the number of genes per Mb (the number of genes was taken from GeneMap98 (ref. 100)). Chromosomes 16, 17, 22 and particularly 19 are clear outliers, with a density of CpG islands that is even greater than would be expected from the high gene counts for these four chromosomes.
878

Figure 15 Distance in cM along the genetic map of chromosome 12 plotted against position in Mb in the draft genome sequence. Female, male and sex-averaged maps are shown. Female recombination rates are much higher than male recombination rates. The increased slopes at either end of the chromosome re¯ect the increased rates of recombination per Mb near the telomeres. Conversely, the ¯atter slope near the centromere shows decreased recombination there, especially in male meiosis. This is typical of the other chromosomes as well (see http://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/ mapPlots). Discordant markers may be map, marker placement or assembly errors.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
20±35 Mb. The increase is most pronounced in the male meiotic map. The effect can be seen, for example, from the higher slope at both ends of chromosome 12 (Fig. 15). Regional and sex-speci®c effects have been observed for chromosome 21 (refs 110, 134). Why is recombination higher on smaller chromosome arms? A higher rate would increase the likelihood of at least one crossover during meiosis on each chromosome arm, as is generally observed in human chiasmata counts135. Crossovers are believed to be necessary for normal meiotic disjunction of homologous chromosome pairs in eukaryotes. An extreme example is the pseudoautosomal regions on chromosomes Xp and Yp, which pair during male meiosis; this physical region of only 2.6 Mb has a genetic length of 50 cM (corresponding to 20 cM per Mb), with the result that a crossover is virtually assured. Mechanistically, the increased rate of recombination on shorter chromosome arms could be explained if, once an initial recombination event occurs, additional nearby events are blocked by positive crossover interference on each arm. Evidence from yeast mutants in which interference is abolished shows that interference plays a key role in distributing a limited number of crossovers among the various chromosome arms in yeast136. An alternative possibility is that a checkpoint mechanism scans for and enforces the presence of at least one crossover on each chromosome arm. Variation in recombination rates along chromosomes and between the sexes is likely to re¯ect variation in the initiation of meiosis-induced double-strand breaks (DSBs) that initiate recombination. DSBs in yeast have been associated with open chromatin137,138, rather than with speci®c DNA sequence motifs. With the availability of the draft genome sequence, it should be possible to explore in an analogous manner whether variation in human recombination rates re¯ects systematic differences in chromosome accessibility during meiosis. Amoeba dubia139,140. This mystery (the C-value paradox) was largely resolved with the recognition that genomes can contain a large quantity of repetitive sequence, far in excess of that devoted to protein-coding genes (reviewed in refs 140, 141). In the human, coding sequences comprise less than 5% of the genome (see below), whereas repeat sequences account for at least 50% and probably much more. Broadly, the repeats fall into ®ve classes: (1) transposon-derived repeats, often referred to as interspersed repeats; (2) inactive (partially) retroposed copies of cellular genes (including protein-coding genes and small structural RNAs), usually referred to as processed pseudogenes; (3) simple sequence repeats, consisting of direct repetitions of relatively short k-mers such as (A)n, (CA)n or (CGG)n; (4) segmental duplications, consisting of blocks of around 10±300 kb that have been copied from one region of the genome into another region; and (5) blocks of tandemly repeated sequences, such as at centromeres, telomeres, the short arms of acrocentric chromosomes and ribosomal gene clusters. (These regions are intentionally under-represented in the draft genome sequence and are not discussed here.) Repeats are often described as `junk' and dismissed as uninteresting. However, they actually represent an extraordinary trove of information about biological processes. The repeats constitute a rich palaeontological record, holding crucial clues about evolutionary events and forces. As passive markers, they provide assays for studying processes of mutation and selection. It is possible to recognize cohorts of repeats `born' at the same time and to follow their fates in different regions of the genome or in different species. As active agents, repeats have reshaped the genome by causing ectopic rearrangements, creating entirely new genes, modifying and reshuf¯ing existing genes, and modulating overall GC content. They also shed light on chromosome structure and dynamics, and provide tools for medical genetic and population genetic studies. The human is the ®rst repeat-rich genome to be sequenced, and so we investigated what information could be gleaned from this majority component of the human genome. Although some of the general observations about repeats were suggested by previous studies, the draft genome sequence provides the ®rst comprehensive view, allowing some questions to be resolved and new mysteries to emerge.
Transposon-derived repeats

Repeat content of the human genome
A puzzling observation in the early days of molecular biology was that genome size does not correlate well with organismal complexity. For example, Homo sapiens has a genome that is 200 times as large as that of the yeast S. cerevisiae, but 200 times as small as that of

3

2.5 Recombination rate (cM per Mb)

2

1.5

1

0.5

0 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Length of chromosome arm (Mb) 140 160

Figure 16 Rate of recombination averaged across the euchromatic portion of each chromosome arm plotted against the length of the chromosome arm in Mb. For large chromosomes, the average recombination rates are very similar, but as chromosome arm length decreases, average recombination rates rise markedly.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

Most human repeat sequence is derived from transposable elements142,143. We can currently recognize about 45% of the genome as belonging to this class. Much of the remaining `unique' DNA must also be derived from ancient transposable element copies that have diverged too far to be recognized as such. To describe our analyses of interspersed repeats, it is necessary brie¯y to review the relevant features of human transposable elements. Classes of transposable elements. In mammals, almost all transposable elements fall into one of four types (Fig. 17), of which three transpose through RNA intermediates and one transposes directly as DNA. These are long interspersed elements (LINEs), short interspersed elements (SINEs), LTR retrotransposons and DNA transposons. LINEs are one of the most ancient and successful inventions in eukaryotic genomes. In humans, these transposons are about 6 kb long, harbour an internal polymerase II promoter and encode two open reading frames (ORFs). Upon translation, a LINE RNA assembles with its own encoded proteins and moves to the nucleus, where an endonuclease activity makes a single-stranded nick and the reverse transcriptase uses the nicked DNA to prime reverse transcription from the 39 end of the LINE RNA. Reverse transcription frequently fails to proceed to the 59 end, resulting in many truncated, nonfunctional insertions. Indeed, most LINE-derived repeats are short, with an average size of 900 bp for all LINE1 copies, and a median size of 1,070 bp for copies of the currently active LINE1 element (L1Hs). New insertion sites are ¯anked by a small
879

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
Classes of interspersed repeat in the human genome Length LINEs SINEs Retrovirus-like elements Autonomous Non-autonomous Autonomous Non-autonomous
gag ORF1 AB ORF2 (pol) AAA

Copy number 850,000 1,500,000

Fraction of genome 21% 13%

6­8 kb 100­300 bp

AAA pol (env)

6­11 kb 450,000 8% 1.5­3 kb

(gag)

DNA transposon fossils

Autonomous Non-autonomous

transposase

2­3 kb 300,000 80­3,000 bp 3%

Figure 17 Almost all transposable elements in mammals fall into one of four classes. See text for details.

target site duplication of 7±20 bp. The LINE machinery is believed to be responsible for most reverse transcription in the genome, including the retrotransposition of the non-autonomous SINEs144 and the creation of processed pseudogenes145,146. Three distantly related LINE families are found in the human genome: LINE1, LINE2 and LINE3. Only LINE1 is still active. SINEs are wildly successful freeloaders on the backs of LINE elements. They are short (about 100±400 bp), harbour an internal polymerase III promoter and encode no proteins. These nonautonomous transposons are thought to use the LINE machinery for transposition. Indeed, most SINEs `live' by sharing the 39 end with a resident LINE element144. The promoter regions of all known SINEs are derived from tRNA sequences, with the exception of a single monophyletic family of SINEs derived from the signal recognition particle component 7SL. This family, which also does not share its 39 end with a LINE, includes the only active SINE in the human genome: the Alu element. By contrast, the mouse has both tRNA-derived and 7SL-derived SINEs. The human genome contains three distinct monophyletic families of SINEs: the active Alu, and the inactive MIR and Ther2/MIR3. LTR retroposons are ¯anked by long terminal direct repeats that contain all of the necessary transcriptional regulatory elements. The autonomous elements (retrotransposons) contain gag and pol genes, which encode a protease, reverse transcriptase, RNAse H and integrase. Exogenous retroviruses seem to have arisen from endogenous retrotransposons by acquisition of a cellular envelope gene (env)147. Transposition occurs through the retroviral mechanism with reverse transcription occurring in a cytoplasmic virus-like particle, primed by a tRNA (in contrast to the nuclear location and chromosomal priming of LINEs). Although a variety of LTR retrotransposons exist, only the vertebrate-speci®c endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) appear to have been active in the mammalian genome. Mammalian retroviruses fall into three classes (I±III), each comprising many families with independent origins. Most (85%) of the LTR retroposon-derived `fossils' consist only of an isolated LTR, with the internal sequence having been lost by homologous recombination between the ¯anking LTRs. DNA transposons resemble bacterial transposons, having terminal inverted repeats and encoding a transposase that binds near the inverted repeats and mediates mobility through a `cut-and-paste' mechanism. The human genome contains at least seven major classes of DNA transposon, which can be subdivided into many families with independent origins148 (see RepBase, http://www. girinst.org/,server/repbase.html). DNA transposons tend to have short life spans within a species. This can be explained by contrasting the modes of transposition of DNA transposons and LINE elements. LINE transposition tends to involve only functional elements, owing to the cis-preference by which LINE proteins assemble with the RNA from which they were translated. By
880

contrast, DNA transposons cannot exercise a cis-preference: the encoded transposase is produced in the cytoplasm and, when it returns to the nucleus, it cannot distinguish active from inactive elements. As inactive copies accumulate in the genome, transposition becomes less ef®cient. This checks the expansion of any DNA transposon family and in due course causes it to die out. To survive, DNA transposons must eventually move by horizontal transfer to virgin genomes, and there is considerable evidence for such transfer149±153. Transposable elements employ different strategies to ensure their evolutionary survival. LINEs and SINEs rely almost exclusively on vertical transmission within the host genome154 (but see refs 148, 155). DNA transposons are more promiscuous, requiring relatively frequent horizontal transfer. LTR retroposons use both strategies, with some being long-term active residents of the human genome (such as members of the ERVL family) and others having only short residence times.
Table 11 Number of copies and fraction of genome for classes of interspersed repeat
Number of copies (´ 1,000) Total number of bases in the draft genome sequence (Mb) 359.6 290.1 60.1 9.3 558.8 462.1 88.2 8.4 227.0 79.2 8.5 39.5 99.8 77.6 38.1 4.3 28.0 0.9 2.6 0.5 3.2 3.8 1,226.8 Fraction of the draft genome sequence (%) 13.14 10.60 2.20 0.34 20.42 16.89 3.22 0.31 8.29 2.89 0.31 1.44 3.65 2.84 1.39 0.16 1.02 0.03 0.10 0.02 0.12 0.14 44.83 Number of families (subfamilies)

SINEs Alu MIR MIR3 LINEs LINE1 LINE2 LINE3 LTR elements ERV-class I ERV(K)-class II ERV (L)-class III MaLR DNA elements hAT group MER1-Charlie Zaphod Tc-1 group MER2-Tigger Tc2 Mariner PiggyBac-like Unclassi®ed Unclassi®ed Total interspersed repeats

1,558 1,090 393 75 868 516 315 37 443 112 8 83 240 294 182 13 57 4 14 2 22 3

1 (,20) 1 (1) 1 (1) 1 (,55) 1 (2) 1 (2) 72 (132) 10 (20) 21 (42) 1 (31) 25 (50) 4 (10) 12 (28) 1 (5) 4 (5) 10 (20) 7 (7) 3 (4)

............................................................................................................................................................................. The number of copies and base pair contributions of the major classes and subclasses of transposable elements in the human genome. Data extracted from a RepeatMasker analysis of the draft genome sequence (RepeatMasker version 09092000, sensitive settings, using RepBase Update 5.08). In calculating percentages, RepeatMasker excluded the runs of Ns linking the contigs in the draft genome sequence. In the last column, separate consensus sequences in the repeat databases are considered subfamilies, rather than families, when the sequences are closely related or related through intermediate subfamilies.

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

articles
Census of human repeats. We began by taking a census of the transposable elements in the draft genome sequence, using a recently updated version of the RepeatMasker program (version 09092000) run under sensitive settings (see http://repeatmasker. genome.washington.edu). This program scans sequences to identify full-length and partial members of all known repeat families represented in RepBase Update (version 5.08; see http://www. girinst.org/,server/repbase.html and ref. 156). Table 11 shows the number of copies and fraction of the draft genome sequence occupied by each of the four major classes and the main subclasses. The precise count of repeats is obviously underestimated because the genome sequence is not ®nished, but their density and other properties can be stated with reasonable con®dence. Currently recognized SINEs, LINEs, LTR retroposons and DNA transposon copies comprise 13%, 20%, 8% and 3% of the sequence, respectively. We expect these densities to grow as more repeat families are recognized, among which will be lower copy number LTR elements and DNA transposons, and possibly high copy number ancient (highly diverged) repeats. Age distribution. The age distribution of the repeats in the human genome provides a rich `fossil record' stretching over several hundred million years. The ancestry and approximate age of each fossil can be inferred by exploiting the fact that each copy is derived from, and therefore initially carried the sequence of, a then-active transposon and, being generally under no functional constraint, has accumulated mutations randomly and independently of other copies. We can infer the sequence of the ancestral active elements by clustering the modern derivatives into phylogenetic trees and building a consensus based on the multiple sequence alignment of a cluster of copies. Using available consensus sequences for known repeat subfamilies, we calculated the per cent divergence from the inferred ancestral active transposon for each of three million interspersed repeats in the draft genome sequence. The percentage of sequence divergence can be converted into an approximate age in millions of years (Myr) on the basis of evolutionary information. Care is required in calibrating the clock, because the rate of sequence divergence may not be constant over time or between lineages139. The relative-rate test157 can be used to calculate the sequence divergence that accumulated in a lineage after a given timepoint, on the basis of comparison with a sibling species that diverged at that time and an outgroup species. For example, the substitution rate over roughly the last 25 Myr in the human lineage can be calculated by using old world monkeys (which diverged about 25 Myr ago) as a sibling species and new world monkeys as an outgroup. We have used currently available calibrations for the human lineage, but the issue should be revisited as sequence information becomes available from different mammals. Figure 18a shows the representation of various classes of trans-

a

2.6 2.4 2.2

b
Fraction of human genome comprised by repeat class (%)

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
% 7% % 12 <3 3­ 7­ 12 ­1 8%

Fraction of human genome comprised by repeat class (%)

2.0 1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 <1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 Per cent substitution from consensus sequences 34

Ranges of substitution level representing ~25 million years each

d
Fraction of mouse genome comprised by repeat class (%)

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
<8 % 8­ 16 % 16 ­2 4% 24 ­3 2%

c
Fraction of mouse genome comprised by repeat class (%) 1.4 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 <1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 Per cent substitution from consensus sequences
SINE/Alu SINE/MIR SINE/other LINE/L1 LINE/L2 LTR DNA

Ranges of substitution level representing ~25 million years each

Figure 18 Age distribution of interspersed repeats in the human and mouse genomes. Bases covered by interspersed repeats were sorted by their divergence from their consensus sequence (which approximates the repeat's original sequence at the time of insertion). The average number of substitutions per 100 bp (substitution level, K ) was calculated from the mismatch level p assuming equal frequency of all substitutions (the one-parameter Jukes±Cantor model, K = -3/4ln(1 - 4/3p )). This model tends to underestimate higher substitution levels. CpG dinucleotides in the consensus were excluded from the substitution level calculations because the C!T transition rate in CpG pairs is about tenfold higher than other transitions and causes distortions in comparing
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

transposable elements with high and low CpG content. a, The distribution, for the human genome, in bins corresponding to 1% increments in substitution levels. b, The data grouped into bins representing roughly equal time periods of 25 Myr. c,d, Equivalent data for available mouse genomic sequence. There is a different correspondence between substitution levels and time periods owing to different rates of nucleotide substitution in the two species. The correspondence between substitution levels and time periods was largely derived from three-way species comparisons (relative rate test139,157 ) with the age estimates based on fossil data. Human divergence from gibbon 20±30 Myr; old world monkey 25±35 Myr; prosimians 55±80 Myr; eutherian mammalian radiation ,100 Myr.
881

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
posable elements in categories re¯ecting equal amounts of sequence divergence. In Fig. 18b the data are grouped into four bins corresponding to successive 25-Myr periods, on the basis of an approximate clock. Figure 19 shows the mean ages of various subfamilies of DNA transposons. Several facts are apparent from these graphs. First, most interspersed repeats in the human genome predate the eutherian radiation. This is a testament to the extremely slow rate with which nonfunctional sequences are cleared from vertebrate genomes (see below concerning comparison with the ¯y). Second, LINE and SINE elements have extremely long lives. The monophyletic LINE1 and Alu lineages are at least 150 and 80 Myr old, respectively. In earlier times, the reigning transposons were LINE2 and MIR148,158. The SINE MIR was perfectly adapted for reverse transcription by LINE2, as it carried the same 50-base sequence at its 39 end. When LINE2 became extinct 80±100 Myr ago, it spelled the doom of MIR. Third, there were two major peaks of DNA transposon activity (Fig. 19). The ®rst involved Charlie elements and occurred long before the eutherian radiation; the second involved Tigger elements and occurred after this radiation. Because DNA transposons can produce large-scale chromosome rearrangements159±162, it is possible that widespread activity could be involved in speciation events. Fourth, there is no evidence for DNA transposon activity in the past 50 Myr in the human genome. The youngest two DNA transposon families that we can identify in the draft genome sequence (MER75 and MER85) show 6±7% divergence from their respective consensus sequences representing the ancestral element (Fig. 19), indicating that they were active before the divergence of humans and new world monkeys. Moreover, these elements were relatively unsuccessful, together contributing just 125 kb to the draft genome sequence.
8,000
Charlie

Number of kb covered by family

7,000 6,000 5,000 4,000 3,000 2,000 1,000 0 0

PiggyBac-like Mariner Tc2 Tigger Unclassified Zaphod

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

Average nucleotide substitution level for family

Figure 19 Median ages and per cent of the genome covered by subfamilies of DNA transposons. The Charlie and Zaphod elements were hobo-Activator-Tam3 (hAT) DNA transposons; Mariner, Tc2 and Tigger were Tc1-like elements. Unlike retroposons, DNA transposons are thought to have a short life span in a genome. Thus, the average or median divergence of copies from the consensus is a particularly accurate measure of the age of the DNA transposon copies.
Table 12 Number and nature of interspersed repeats in eukaryotic genomes
Human Percentage of bases LINE/SINE LTR DNA Total 33.40% 8.10% 2.80% 44.40% Approximate number of families 6 100 60 170 Percentage of bases 0.70% 1.50% 0.70% 3.10% Fly

Finally, LTR retroposons appear to be teetering on the brink of extinction, if they have not already succumbed. For example, the most proli®c elements (ERVL and MaLRs) ¯ourished for more than 100 Myr but appear to have died out about 40 Myr ago163,164. Only a single LTR retroposon family (HERVK10) is known to have transposed since our divergence from the chimpanzee 7 Myr ago, with only one known copy (in the HLA region) that is not shared between all humans165. In the draft genome sequence, we can identify only three full-length copies with all ORFs intact (the ®nal total may be slightly higher owing to the imperfect state of the draft genome sequence). More generally, the overall activity of all transposons has declined markedly over the past 35±50 Myr, with the possible exception of LINE1 (Fig. 18). Indeed, apart from an exceptional burst of activity of Alus peaking around 40 Myr ago, there would appear to have been a fairly steady decline in activity in the hominid lineage since the mammalian radiation. The extent of the decline must be even greater than it appears because old repeats are gradually removed by random deletion and because old repeat families are harder to recognize and likely to be under-represented in the repeat databases. (We con®rmed that the decline in transposition is not an artefact arising from errors in the draft genome sequence, which, in principle, could increase the divergence level in recent elements. First, the sequence error rate (Table 9) is far too low to have a signi®cant effect on the apparent age of recent transposons; and second, the same result is seen if one considers only ®nished sequence.) What explains the decline in transposon activity in the lineage leading to humans? We return to this question below, in the context of the observation that there is no similar decline in the mouse genome. Comparison with other organisms. We compared the complement of transposable elements in the human genome with those of the other sequenced eukaryotic genomes. We analysed the ¯y, worm and mustard weed genomes for the number and nature of repeats (Table 12) and the age distribution (Fig. 20). (For the ¯y, we analysed the 114 Mb of un®nished `large' contigs produced by the whole-genome shotgun assembly166, which are reported to represent euchromatic sequence. Similar results were obtained by analysing 30 Mb of ®nished euchromatic sequence.) The human genome stands in stark contrast to the genomes of the other organisms. (1) The euchromatic portion of the human genome has a much higher density of transposable element copies than the euchromatic DNA of the other three organisms. The repeats in the other organisms may have been slightly underestimated because the repeat databases for the other organisms are less complete than for the human, especially with regard to older elements; on the other hand, recent additions to these databases appear to increase the repeat content only marginally. (2) The human genome is ®lled with copies of ancient transposons, whereas the transposons in the other genomes tend to be of more recent origin. The difference is most marked with the ¯y, but is clear for the other genomes as well. The accumulation of old repeats is likely to be determined by the rate at which organisms engage in `housecleaning' through genomic deletion. Studies of pseudogenes

Worm Approximate number of families 20 50 20 90 Percentage of bases 0.40% 0.00% 5.30% 6.50% Approximate number of families 10 4 80 90

Mustard weed Percentage of bases 0.50% 4.80% 5.10% 10.50% Approximate number of families 10 70 80 160

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... The complete genomes of ¯y, worm, and chromosomes 2 and 4 of mustard weed (as deposited at ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/genomes) were screened against the repeats in RepBase Update 5.02 (September 2000) with RepeatMasker at sensitive settings.

882

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

articles
have suggested that small deletions occur at a rate that is 75-fold higher in ¯ies than in mammals; the half-life of such nonfunctional DNA is estimated at 12 Myr for ¯ies and 800 Myr for mammals167. The rate of large deletions has not been systematically compared, but seems likely also to differ markedly. (3) Whereas in the human two repeat families (LINE1 and Alu) account for 60% of all interspersed repeat sequence, the other organisms have no dominant families. Instead, the worm, ¯y and mustard weed genomes all contain many transposon families, each consisting of typically hundreds to thousands of elements. This difference may be explained by the observation that the vertically transmitted, long-term residential LINE and SINE elements represent 75% of interspersed repeats in the human genome, but only 5± 25% in the other genomes. In contrast, the horizontally transmitted and shorter-lived DNA transposons represent only a small portion of all interspersed repeats in humans (6%) but a much larger fraction in ¯y, mustard weed and worm (25%, 49% and 87%, respectively). These features of the human genome are probably general to all mammals. The relative lack of horizontally transmitted elements may have its origin in the well developed immune system of mammals, as horizontal transfer requires infectious vectors, such as viruses, against which the immune system guards. We also looked for differences among mammals, by comparing the transposons in the human and mouse genomes. As with the human genome, care is required in calibrating the substitution clock for the mouse genome. There is considerable evidence that the rate of substitution per Myr is higher in rodent lineages than in the hominid lineages139,168,169. In fact, we found clear evidence for different rates of substitution by examining families of transposable elements whose insertions predate the divergence of the human and mouse lineages. In an analysis of 22 such families, we found that the substitution level was an average of 1.7-fold higher in mouse than human (not shown). (This is likely to be an underestimate because of an ascertainment bias against the most diverged copies.) The faster clock in mouse is also evident from the fact that the ancient LINE2 and MIR elements, which transposed before the mammalian radiation and are readily detectable in the human genome, cannot be readily identi®ed in available mouse genomic sequence (Fig. 18). We used the best available estimates to calibrate substitution levels and time169. The ratio of substitution rates varied from about 1.7-fold higher over the past 100 Myr to about 2.6-fold higher over the past 25 Myr. The analysis shows that, although the overall density of the four transposon types in human and mouse is similar, the age distribution is strikingly different (Fig. 18). Transposon activity in the mouse genome has not undergone the decline seen in humans and proceeds at a much higher rate. In contrast to their possible extinction in humans, LTR retroposons are alive and well in the
100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0

Proportion of interspersed repeats (%)

>25% <25% <20% <15% <10%

Oldest

mouse with such representatives as the active IAP family and putatively active members of the long-lived ERVL and MaLR families. LINE1 and a variety of SINEs are quite active. These evolutionary ®ndings are consistent with the empirical observations that new spontaneous mutations are 30 times more likely to be caused by LINE insertions in mouse than in human (,3% versus 0.1%)170 and 60 times more likely to be caused by transposable elements in general. It is estimated that around 1 in 600 mutations in human are due to transpositions, whereas 10% of mutations in mouse are due to transpositions (mostly IAP insertions). The contrast between human and mouse suggests that the explanation for the decline of transposon activity in humans may lie in some fundamental difference between hominids and rodents. Population structure and dynamics would seem to be likely suspects. Rodents tend to have large populations, whereas hominid populations tend to be small and may undergo frequent bottlenecks. Evolutionary forces affected by such factors include inbreeding and genetic drift, which might affect the persistence of active transposable elements171. Studies in additional mammalian lineages may shed light on the forces responsible for the differences in the activity of transposable elements172. Variation in the distribution of repeats. We next explored variation in the distribution of repeats across the draft genome sequence, by calculating the repeat density in windows of various sizes across the genome. There is striking variation at smaller scales. Some regions of the genome are extraordinarily dense in repeats. The prizewinner appears to be a 525-kb region on chromosome Xp11, with an overall transposable element density of 89%. This region contains a 200-kb segment with 98% density, as well as a segment of 100 kb in which LINE1 sequences alone comprise 89% of the sequence. In addition, there are regions of more than 100 kb with extremely high densities of Alu (. 56% at three loci, including one on 7q11 with a 50-kb stretch of . 61% Alu) and the ancient transposons MIR (. 15% on chromosome 1p36) and LINE2 (. 18% on chromosome 22q12). In contrast, some genomic regions are nearly devoid of repeats. The absence of repeats may be a sign of large-scale cis-regulatory elements that cannot tolerate being interrupted by insertions. The four regions with the lowest density of interspersed repeats in the human genome are the four homeobox gene clusters, HOXA, HOXB, HOXC and HOXD (Fig. 21). Each locus contains regions of around 100 kb containing less than 2% interspersed repeats. Ongoing sequence analysis of the four HOX clusters in mouse, rat and baboon shows a similar absence of transposable elements, and reveals a high density of conserved noncoding elements (K. Dewar and B. Birren, manuscript in preparation). The presence of a complex collection of regulatory regions may explain why individual HOX genes carried in transgenic mice fail to show proper regulation. It may be worth investigating other repeat-poor regions, such as a region on chromosome 8q21 (1.5% repeat over 63 kb) containing a gene encoding a homeodomain zinc-®nger protein (homologous to mouse pID 9663936), a region on chromosome 1p36 (5% repeat over 100 kb) with no obvious genes and a region on chromosome 18q22 (4% over 100 kb) containing three genes of unknown function (among which is KIAA0450). It will be interesting to see whether the homologous regions in the mouse genome have
chr 22 chr 2

<5% Youngest

or m

us w tard ee d

um

100 kb

Fl

HoxD cluster

an

y

H

W

M

Figure 20 Comparison of the age of interspersed repeats in eukaryotic genomes. The copies of repeats were pooled by their nucleotide substitution level from the consensus.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

Figure 21 Two regions of about 1 Mb on chromosomes 2 and 22. Red bars, interspersed repeats; blue bars, exons of known genes. Note the de®cit of repeats in the HoxD cluster, which contains a collection of genes with complex, interrelated regulation.
883

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
Proportion of genome comprised by each class (%) 60
SSR LINE2 LINE1 MIR ALU

50

DNA LTR

40

30

20

10

0
<36 36­38 38­40 40­42 42­44 44­46 46­48 48­50 50­52 52­54 >54

GC content (%)

Figure 22 Density of the major repeat classes as a function of local GC content, in windows of 50 kb.

2.0 Frequency of Alu class relative to its average density in the genome 1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0
6 8 0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 <3 >5 ­3 ­4 ­4 ­4 ­4 ­4 ­5 ­5 ­5 4 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52

100

Proportion of DNA transposons comprised by each age group (%)

80

Nucleotide subsitution level
24­30% 21­23% 16­20%

60

40

14­15.5% 0­13%

20

0
<36 36­38 38­40 40­42 42­44 44­46 46­48 48­50 50­52 >52 GC content bins (%)

GC content bins (%) AluY < 1% (<1 Myr) AluY 1­4% (1­5 Myr) AluY > 4% (5­30 Myr) AluSc (25­35 Myr) AluS (35­60 Myr) AluJ, FAM (60­100 Myr)

Figure 24 DNA transposon copies in AT-rich DNA tend to be younger than those in more GC-rich DNA. DNA transposon families were grouped into ®ve age categories by their median substitution level (see Fig. 19). The proportion attributed to each age class is shown as a function of GC content. Similar patterns are seen for LINE1 and LTR elements.

Figure 23 Alu elements target AT-rich DNA, but accumulate in GC-rich DNA. This graph shows the relative distribution of various Alu cohorts as a function of local GC content. The divergence levels (including CpG sites) and ages of the cohorts are shown in the key.

similarly resisted the insertion of transposable elements during rodent evolution. Distribution by GC content. We next focused on the correlation between the nature of the transposons in a region and its GC content. We calculated the density of each repeat type as a function of the GC content in 50-kb windows (Fig. 22). As has been reported142,173±176, LINE sequences occur at much higher density in AT-rich regions (roughly fourfold enriched), whereas SINEs (MIR, Alu) show the opposite trend (for Alu, up to ®vefold lower in ATrich DNA). LTR retroposons and DNA transposons show a more uniform distribution, dipping only in the most GC-rich regions. The preference of LINEs for AT-rich DNA seems like a reasonable way for a genomic parasite to accommodate its host, by targeting gene-poor AT-rich DNA and thereby imposing a lower mutational burden. Mechanistically, selective targeting is nicely explained by the fact that the preferred cleavage site of the LINE endonuclease is TTTT/A (where the slash indicates the point of cleavage), which is used to prime reverse transcription from the poly(A) tail of LINE RNA177. The contrary behaviour of SINEs, however, is baf¯ing. How do
884

SINEs accumulate in GC-rich DNA, particularly if they depend on the LINE transposition machinery178? Notably, the same pattern is seen for the Alu-like B1 and the tRNA-derived SINEs in mouse and for MIR in human142. One possibility is that SINEs somehow target GC-rich DNA for insertion. The alternative is that SINEs initially insert with the same proclivity for AT-rich DNA as LINEs, but that the distribution is subsequently reshaped by evolutionary forces142,179. We used the draft genome sequence to investigate this mystery by comparing the proclivities of young, adolescent, middle-aged and old Alus (Fig. 23). Strikingly, recent Alus show a preference for ATrich DNA resembling that of LINEs, whereas progressively older Alus show a progressively stronger bias towards GC-rich DNA. These results indicate that the GC bias must result from strong pressure: Fig. 23 shows that a 13-fold enrichment of Alus in GC-rich DNA has occurred within the last 30 Myr, and possibly more recently. These results raise a new mystery. What is the force that produces the great and rapid enrichment of Alus in GC-rich DNA? One explanation may be that deletions are more readily tolerated in gene-poor AT-rich regions than in gene-rich GC-rich regions, resulting in older elements being enriched in GC-rich regions. Such an enrichment is seen for transposable elements such as
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
DNA transposons (Fig. 24). However, this effect seems too slow and too small to account for the observed remodelling of the Alu distribution. This can be seen by performing a similar analysis for LINE elements (Fig. 25). There is no signi®cant change in the LINE distribution over the past 100 Myr, in contrast to the rapid change seen for Alu. There is an eventual shift after more than 100 Myr, although its magnitude is still smaller than seen for Alus. These observations indicate that there may be some force acting particularly on Alus. This could be a higher rate of random loss of Alus in AT-rich DNA, negative selection against Alus in AT-rich DNA or positive selection in favour of Alus in GC-rich DNA. The ®rst two possibilities seem unlikely because AT-rich DNA is
2.0 Frequency of L1 class relative to its average density in the genome 1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0
6 2 0 0 8 8 4 <3 ­4 6 ­5 2 40 38 46 48 36 42 44 50 >5 ­4 ­4 ­3 ­4 ­4 ­5 2

GC content bins (%) L1PA (0­65 Myr) L1PB (50­80 Myr) L1MA (50­100 Myr) L1MB (100­150 Myr) L1M4 (80­150 Myr)

Figure 25 Distribution of various LINE cohorts as a function of local GC content. The divergence levels and ages of the cohorts are shown in the key. (The divergence levels were measured for the 39 UTR of the LINE1 element only, which is best characterized evolutionarily. This region contains almost no CpG sites, and thus 1% divergence level corresponds to a much longer time than for CpG-rich Alu copies).

gene-poor and tolerates the accumulation of other transposable elements. The third seems more feasible, in that it involves selecting in favour of the minority of Alus in GC-rich regions rather than against the majority that lie in AT-rich regions. But positive selection for Alus in GC-rich regions would imply that they bene®t the organism. Schmid180 has proposed such a function for SINEs. This hypothesis is based on the observation that in many species SINEs are transcribed under conditions of stress, and the resulting RNAs speci®cally bind a particular protein kinase (PKR) and block its ability to inhibit protein translation181±183. SINE RNAs would thus promote protein translation under stress. SINE RNA may be well suited to such a role in regulating protein translation, because it can be quickly transcribed in large quantities from thousands of elements and it can function without protein translation. Under this theory, there could be positive selection for SINEs in readily transcribed open chromatin such as is found near genes. This could explain the retention of Alus in gene-rich GC-rich regions. It is also consistent with the observation that SINE density in AT-rich DNA is higher near genes142. Further insight about Alus comes from the relationship between Alu density and GC content on individual chromosomes (Fig. 26). There are two outliers. Chromosome 19 is even richer in Alus than predicted by its (high) GC content; the chromosome comprises 2% of the genome, but contains 5% of Alus. On the other hand, chromosome Y shows the lowest density of Alus relative to its GC content, being higher than average for GC content less than 40% and lower than average for GC content over 40%. Even in AT-rich DNA, Alus are under-represented on chromosome Y compared with other young interspersed repeats (see below). These phenomena may be related to an unusually high gene density on chromosome 19 and an unusually low density of somatically active genes on chromosome Y (both relative to GC content). This would be consistent with the idea that Alu correlates not with GC content but with actively transcribed genes. Our results may support the controversial idea that SINEs actually earn their keep in the genome. Clearly, much additional work will be needed to prove or disprove the hypothesis that SINEs are genomic symbionts. Biases in human mutation. Indirect studies have suggested that nucleotide substitution is not uniform across mammalian
Chr1 Chr2 Chr3 Chr4 Chr5 Chr6 Chr7 Chr8 Chr9 Chr10 Chr11 Chr12 Chr13 Chr14 Chr15 Chr16 Chr17 Chr18 Chr19 Chr20 Chr21 Chr22 ChrX ChrY

0.35

0.30 Proportion comprised by Alu

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05 0 <36 36­38 38­40 40­42 42­44 44­46 46­48 48­50 50­52 >52 GC content bins (%)

Figure 26 Comparison of the Alu density of each chromosome as a function of local GC content. At higher GC levels, the Alu density varies widely between chromosomes, with chromosome 19 being a particular outlier. In contrast, the LINE1 density pattern is quite
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

uniform for most chromosomes, with the exception of a 1.5 to 2-fold over-representation in AT-rich regions of the X and Y chromosomes (not shown).

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

885

articles
genomes184±187. By studying sets of repeat elements belonging to a common cohort, one can directly measure nucleotide substitution rates in different regions of the genome. We ®nd strong evidence that the pattern of neutral substitution differs as a function of local GC content (Fig. 27). Because the results are observed in repetitive elements throughout the genome, the variation in the pattern of nucleotide substitution seems likely to be due to differences in the underlying mutational process rather than to selection. The effect can be seen most clearly by focusing on the substitution process g $ a, where g denotes GC or CG base pairs and a denotes ATor TA base pairs. If K is the equilibrium constant in the direction of a base pairs (de®ned by the ratio of the forward and reverse rates), then the equilibrium GC content should be 1/(1 + K). Two observations emerge. First, there is a regional bias in substitution patterns. The equilibrium constant varies as a function of local GC content: g base pairs are more likely to mutate towards a base pairs in AT-rich regions than in GC-rich regions. For the analysis in Fig. 27, the equilibrium constant K is 2.5, 1.9 and 1.2 when the draft genome sequence is partitioned into three bins with average GC content of 37, 43 and 50%, respectively. This bias could be due to a reported tendency for GC-rich regions to replicate earlier in the cell cycle than AT-rich regions and for guanine pools, which are limiting for
20 18 16 Substitution level in 18% diverged sequence (%) 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 G C A T A T G C G C T A A T C G A T T A G C C G 60 Average background nucleotide composition 37% GC 43% GC 50% GC

DNA replication, to become depleted late in the cell cycle, thereby resulting in a small but signi®cant shift in substitution towards a base pairs186,188. Another theory proposes that many substitutions are due to differences in DNA repair mechanisms, possibly related to transcriptional activity and thereby to gene density and GC content185,189,190. There is also an absolute bias in substitution patterns resulting in directional pressure towards lower GC content throughout the human genome. The genome is not at equilibrium with respect to the pattern of nucleotide substitution: the expected equilibrium GC content corresponding to the values of K above is 29, 35 and 44% for regions with average GC contents of 37, 43 and 50%, respectively. Recent observations on SNPs190 con®rm that the mutation pattern in GC-rich DNA is biased towards a base pairs; it should be possible to perform similar analyses throughout the genome with the availability of 1.4 million SNPs97,191. On the basis solely of nucleotide substitution patterns, the GC content would be expected to be about 7% lower throughout the genome. What accounts for the higher GC content? One possible explanation is that in GC-rich regions, a considerable fraction of the nucleotides is likely to be under functional constraint owing to the high gene density. Selection on coding regions and regulatory CpG islands may maintain the higher-than-predicted GC content. Another is that throughout the rest of the genome, a constant in¯ux of transposable elements tends to increase GC content (Fig. 28). Young repeat elements clearly have a higher GC content than their surrounding regions, except in extremely GC-rich regions. Moreover, repeat elements clearly shift with age towards a lower GC content, closer to that of the neighbourhood in which they reside. Much of the `non-repeat' DNA in AT-rich regions probably consists of ancient repeats that are not detectable by current methods and that have had more time to approach the local equilibrium value. The repeats can also be used to study how the mutation process is affected by the immediately adjacent nucleotide. Such `context effects' will be discussed elsewhere (A. Kas and A. F. A. Smit, unpublished results). Fast living on chromosome Y. The pattern of interspersed repeats can be used to shed light on the unusual evolutionary history of chromosome Y. Our analysis shows that the genetic material on
65 All DNA Young interspersed repeats (<10% divergence) All interspersed repeats Non-repeat DNA

Type of substitution

Figure 27 Substitution patterns in interspersed repeats differ as a function of GC content. We collected all copies of ®ve DNA transposons (Tigger1, Tigger2, Charlie3, MER1 and HSMAR2), chosen for their high copy number and well de®ned consensus sequences. DNA transposons are optimal for the study of neutral substitutions: they do not segregate into subfamilies with diagnostic differences, presumably because they are short-lived and new active families do not evolve in a genome (see text). Duplicates and close paralogues resulting from duplication after transposition were eliminated. The copies were grouped on the basis of GC content of the ¯anking 1,000 bp on both sides and aligned to the consensus sequence (representing the state of the copy at integration). Recursive efforts using parameters arising from this study did not change the alignments signi®cantly. Alignments were inspected by hand, and obvious misalignments caused by insertions and duplications were eliminated. Substitutions (n  80; 000) were counted for each position in the consensus, excluding those in CpG dinucleotides, and a substitution frequency matrix was de®ned. From the matrices for each repeat (which corresponded to different ages), a single rate matrix was calculated for these bins of GC content (, 40% GC, 40± 47% GC and . 47% GC). Data are shown for a repeat with an average divergence (in non-CpG sites) of 18% in 43% GC content (the repeat has slightly higher divergence in AT-rich DNA and lower in GC-rich DNA). From the rate matrix, we calculated log-likelihood matrices with different entropies (divergence levels), which are theoretically optimal for alignments of neutrally diverged copies to their common ancestral state (A. Kas and A. F. A. Smit, unpublished). These matrices are in use by the RepeatMasker program.
886

GC content of feature (%)

55

50

45

40

35

30 <36 39 43 47 51 >54 GC content of genome DNA (%)

Figure 28 Interspersed repeats tend to diminish the differences between GC bins, despite the fact that GC-rich transposable elements (speci®cally Alu) accumulate in GC-rich DNA, and AT-rich elements (LINE1) in AT-rich DNA. The GC content of particular components of the sequence (repeats, young repeats and non-repeat sequence) was calculated as a function of overall GC content.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
chromosome Y is unusually young, probably owing to a high tolerance for gain of new material by insertion and loss of old material by deletion. Several lines of evidence support this picture. For example, LINE elements on chromosome Yare on average much younger than those on autosomes (not shown). Similarly, MaLRfamily retroposons on chromosome Y are younger than those on autosomes, with the representation of subfamilies showing a strong inverse correlation with the age of the subfamily. Moreover, chromosome Y has a relative over-representation of the younger retroviral class II (ERVK) and a relative under-representation of the primarily older class III (ERVL) compared with other chromosomes. Overall, chromosome Y seems to maintain a youthful appearance by rapid turnover. Interspersed repeats on chromosome Y can also be used to estimate the relative mutation rates, am and af, in the male and female germlines. Chromosome Y always resides in males, whereas chromosome X resides in females twice as often as in males. The substitution rates, mY and mX, on these two chromosomes should thus be in the ratio mY:mX = (am):(am + 2af )/3, provided that one considers equivalent neutral sequences. Several authors have estimated the mutation rate in the male germline to be ®vefold higher than in the female germline, by comparing the rates of evolution of X- and Y-linked genes in humans and primates. However, Page and colleagues192 have challenged these estimates as too high. They studied a 39-kb region that is apparently devoid of genes and resides within a large segmental duplication from X to Y that occurred 3±4 Myr ago in the human lineage. On the basis of phylogenetic analysis of the sequence on human Y and human, chimp and gorilla X, they obtained a much lower estimate of mY:mX = 1.36, corresponding to am:af = 1.7. They suggested that the other estimates may have been higher because they were based on much longer evolutionary periods or because the genes studied may have been under selection. Our database of human repeats provides a powerful resource for addressing this question. We identi®ed the repeat elements from recent subfamilies (effectively, birth cohorts dating from the past 50 Myr) and measured the substitution rates for subfamily members on chromosomes X and Y (Fig. 29). There is a clear linear relationship with a slope of mY:mX = 1.57 corresponding to am:af = 2.1. The estimate is in reasonable agreement with that of Page et al., although it is based on much more total sequence (360 kb on Y, 1.6 Mb on X) and a much longer time period. In particular, the discrepancy with earlier reports is not explained by recent changes in the human lineage. Various theories have been proposed for the higher mutation rate in the male germline, including the greater number of cell divisions in the formation of sperm than eggs and different repair mechanisms in sperm and eggs. Active transposons. We were interested in identifying the youngest retrotransposons in the draft genome sequence. This set should contain the currently active retrotransposons, as well as the insertion sites that are still polymorphic in the human population. The youngest branch in the phylogenetic tree of human LINE1 elements is called L1Hs (ref. 158); it differs in its 39 untranslated region (UTR) by 12 diagnostic substitutions from the next oldest subfamily (L1PA2). Within the L1Hs family, there are two subsets referred to as Ta and pre-Ta, de®ned by a diagnostic trinucleotide193,194. All active L1 elements are thought to belong to these two subsets, because they account for all 14 known cases of human disease arising from new L1 transposition (with 13 belonging to the Ta subset and one to the pre-Ta subset)195,196. These subsets are also of great interest for population genetics because at least 50% are still segregating as polymorphisms in the human population194,197; they provide powerful markers for tracing population history because they represent unique (non-recurrent and non-revertible) genetic events that can be used (along with similarly polymorphic Alus) for reconstructing human migrations. LINE1 elements that are retrotransposition-competent should consist of a full-length sequence and should have both ORFs intact. Eleven such elements from the Ta subset have been identi®ed, including the likely progenitors of mutagenic insertions into the factor VIII and dystrophin genes198±202. A cultured cell retrotransposition assay has revealed that eight of these elements remain retrotransposition-competent200,202,203. We searched the draft genome sequence and identi®ed 535 LINEs belonging to the Ta subset and 415 belonging to the pre-Ta subset. These elements provide a large collection of tools for probing human population history. We also identi®ed those consisting of full-length elements with intact ORFs, which are candidate active LINEs. We found 39 such elements belonging to the Ta subset and 22 belonging to the pre-Ta subset; this substantially increases the number in the ®rst category and provides the ®rst known examples in the second category. These elements can now be tested for retrotransposition competence in the cell culture assay. Preliminary analysis resulted in the identi®cation of two of these elements as the likely progenitors of mutagenic insertions into the b-globin and RP2 genes (R. Badge and J. V. Moran, unpublished data). Similar analyses should allow the identi®cation of the progenitors of most, if not all, other known mutagenic L1 insertions. L1 elements can carry extra DNA if transcription extends through the native transcriptional termination site into ¯anking genomic DNA. This process, termed L1-mediated transduction, provides a means for the mobilization of DNA sequences around the genome and may be a mechanism for `exon shuf¯ing'204. Twenty-one per cent of the 71 full-length L1s analysed contained non-L1-derived sequences before the 39 target-site duplication site, in cases in which the site was unambiguously recognizable. The length of the transduced sequence was 30±970 bp, supporting the suggestion that 0.5± 1.0% of the human genome may have arisen by LINE-based transduction of 39 ¯anking sequences205,206. Our analysis also turned up two instances of 59 transduction (145 bp and 215 bp). Although this possibility had been suggested on the basis of cell culture models195,203, these are the ®rst documented examples. Such events may arise from transcription initiating in a cellular promoter upstream of the L1 elements. L1 transcription is generally con®ned to the germline207,208, but transcription from other promoters could explain a somatic L1 retrotransposition event that resulted in colon cancer206. Transposons as a creative force. The primary force for the origin and expansion of most transposons has been selection for their ability to create progeny, and not a selective advantage for the host. However, these sel®sh pieces of DNA have been responsible for important innovations in many genomes, for example by contributing regulatory elements and even new genes. Twenty human genes have been recognized as probably derived
887

10 Median substitution level of repeat subfamily on Y (%)

5

0 0 5 Median substitution level of repeat subfamily on X (%) 10

Figure 29 Higher substitution rate on chromosome Y than on chromosome X. We calculated the median substitution level (excluding CpG sites) for copies of the most recent L1 subfamilies (L1Hs±L1PA8) on the X and Y chromosomes. Only the 39 UTR of the L1 element was considered because its consensus sequence is best established.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
from transposons142,209. These include the RAG1 and RAG2 recombinases and the major centromere-binding protein CENPB. We scanned the draft genome sequence and identi®ed another 27 cases, bringing the total to 47 (Table 13; refs 142, 209). All but four are derived from DNA transposons, which give rise to only a small proportion of the interspersed repeats in the genome. Why there are so many DNA transposase-like genes, many of which still contain the critical residues for transposase activity, is a mystery. To illustrate this concept, we describe the discovery of one of the new examples. We searched the draft genome sequence to identify the autonomous DNA transposon responsible for the distribution of the non-autonomous MER85 element, one of the most recently (40±50 Myr ago) active DNA transposons. Most non-autonomous elements are internal deletion products of a DNA transposon. We identi®ed one instance of a large (1,782 bp) ORF ¯anked by the 59 and 39 halves of a MER85 element. The ORF encodes a novel protein (partially published as pID 6453533) whose closest homologue is the transposase of the piggyBac DNA transposon, which is found in insects and has the same characteristic TTAA target-site duplications210 as MER85. The ORF is actively transcribed in fetal brain and in cancer cells. That it has not been lost to mutation in 40±50 Myr of evolution (whereas the ¯anking, noncoding, MER85Table 13 Human genes derived from transposable elements
GenBank ID* nID 3150436 pID 2330017 pID 1196425 pID 4773880 pID 131827 pID 29863 EST 2529718 PID 10047247 EST 4524463 pID 4504807 pID 7513096 EST 5112721 EST 11097233 EST 6986275 EST 8616450 EST 8750408 EST 5177004 PID 3413884 PID 7959287 PID 2231380 EST 10219887 PID 6581095 PID 7243087 PID 6581097 PID 7662294 PID 10439678 PID 7243087 PID 7021900 PID 4263748 EST 8161741 pID 4758872 EST 10990063 EST 10101591 pID 7513011 pID 10439744 pID 10047247 pID 10439762 EST 10459804 pID 4160548 BAC 3522927 pID 3327088 EST 1928552 pID 6453533 EST 3594004 BAC 4309921 EST 4073914 EST 1963278 Gene name BC200 Telomerase HERV-3 env Syncytin RAG1 and 2 CENP-B Related transposon family² FLAM Alu³ non-LTR retrotransposon Retroviridae/HERV-R³ Retroviridae/HERV-W³ Tc1-like Tc1/Pogo Tc1/Pogo Tc1/Pogo/Pogo Tc1/Pogo/Pogo Tc1/Pogo/Tigger Tc1/Pogo/Tigger Tc1/Pogo/Tigger Tc1/Pogo/Tigger Tc1/Pogo/Tigger Tc1/Pogo/Tigger Tc1/Pogo/Tigger Tc1/Pogo/Tigger Tc1/Pogo/Tc2 Tc1/Pogo/Tc2 Tc1/Mariner/Hsmar1³ hAT/Hobo hAT/Charlie hAT/Charlie hAT/Charlie hAT/Charlie hAT/Charlie hAT/Charlie hAT/Charlie/Charlie3³ hAT/Charlie/Charlie8³ hAT/Charlie/Charlie9³ hAT/Tip100/Zaphod hAT/Tip100/Zaphod hAT/Tip100/Zaphod hAT/Tip100/Tip100 hAT/Tip100/Tip100 hAT/Tip100/Tip100 hAT/Tip100 hAT/Tip100 hAT/Tam3 hAT/Tam3 hAT/Tam3 hAT/Tam3 piggyBac/MER85³ piggyBac/MER85³ piggyBac/MER85³ piggyBac/MER75³ piggyBac Possible fusion gene§ Newly recognized derivationk

like termini show the typical divergence level of such elements) and is actively transcribed provides strong evidence that it has been adopted by the human genome as a gene. Its function is unknown. LINE1 activity clearly has also had fringe bene®ts. We mentioned above the possibility of exon reshuf¯ing by cotranscription of neighbouring DNA. The LINE1 machinery can also cause reverse transcription of genic mRNAs, which typically results in nonfunctional processed pseudogenes but can, occasionally, give rise to functional processed genes. There are at least eight human and eight mouse genes for which evidence strongly supports such an origin211 (see http://www-i®.uni-muenster.de/exapted-retrogenes/ tables.html). Many other intronless genes may have been created in the same way. Transposons have made other creative contributions to the genome. A few hundred genes, for example, use transcriptional terminators donated by LTR retroposons (data not shown). Other genes employ regulatory elements derived from repeat elements211.
Simple sequence repeats

Simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are a rather different type of repetitive structure that is common in the human genomeÐperfect or slightly imperfect tandem repeats of a particular k-mer. SSRs with a short repeat unit (n = 1±13 bases) are often termed microsa-

Jerky JRKL Sancho

+ + + + + + + + + +

KIAA0461 KIAA1513 Buster1 Buster2 Buster3 KIAA0766 KIAA1353

+ + + + + +

+

+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +

DAP4,pP52rIPK KIAA0543 KIAA1586 Tramp KIAA0637

+ +

+ +

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... The Table lists 47 human genes, with a likely origin in up to 38 different transposon copies. * Where available, the GenBank ID numbers are given for proteins, otherwise a representative EST or a clone name is shown. Six groups (two or three genes each) have similarity at the DNA level well beyond that observed between different DNA transposon families in the genome; they are indicated in italics, with all but the initial member of each group indented. This could be explained if the genes were paralogous (derived from a single inserted transposon and subsequently duplicated). ² Classi®cation of the transposon. ³ Indicates that the transposon from which the gene is derived is precisely known. § Proteins probably formed by fusion of a cellular and transposon gene; many have acquired zinc-®nger domains. k Not previously reported as being derived from transposable element genes. The remaining genes can be found in refs 142, 209.

888

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

articles
Table 14 SSR content of the human genome
Length of repeat unit 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Average bases per Mb 1,660 5,046 1,013 3,383 2,686 1,376 906 1,139 900 1,576 770 Average number of SSR elements per Mb 36.7 43.1 11.8 32.5 17.6 15.2 8.4 11.1 8.6 8.6 8.7

the population. In fact, analysis of the draft genome sequence shows that chromosome X has the same density of (CA)n repeats per Mb as the autosomes (data not shown). Thus, the de®cit of polymorphic markers relative to autosomes results from population genetic forces. Possible explanations include that chromosome X has a smaller effective population size, experiences more frequent selective sweeps reducing diversity (owing to its hemizygosity in males), or has a lower mutation rate (owing to its more frequent passage through the less mutagenic female germline). The availability of the draft genome sequence should provide ways to test these alternative explanations.
Segmental duplications

............................................................................................................................................................................. SSRs were identi®ed by using the computer program Tandem Repeat Finder with the following parameters: match score 2, mismatch score 3, indel 5, minimum alignment 50, maximum repeat length 500, minimum repeat length 1.

tellites, whereas those with longer repeat units (n = 14±500 bases) are often termed minisatellites. With the exception of poly(A) tails from reverse transcribed messages, SSRs are thought to arise by slippage during DNA replication212,213. We compiled a catalogue of all SSRs over a given length in the human draft genome sequence, and studied their properties (Table 14). SSRs comprise about 3% of the human genome, with the greatest single contribution coming from dinucleotide repeats (0.5%). (The precise criteria for the number of repeat units and the extent of divergence allowed in an SSR affect the exact census, but not the qualitative conclusions.) There is approximately one SSR per 2 kb (the number of nonoverlapping tandem repeats is 437 per Mb). The catalogue con®rms various properties of SSRs that have been inferred from sampling approaches (Table 15). The most frequent dinucleotide repeats are AC and AT (50 and 35% of dinucleotide repeats, respectively), whereas AG repeats (15%) are less frequent and GC repeats (0.1%) are greatly under-represented. The most frequent trinucleotides are AAT and AAC (33% and 21%, respectively), whereas ACC (4.0%), AGC (2.2%), ACT (1.4%) and ACG (0.1%) are relatively rare. Overall, trinucleotide SSRs are much less frequent than dinucleotide SSRs214. SSRs have been extremely important in human genetic studies, because they show a high degree of length polymorphism in the human population owing to frequent slippage by DNA polymerase during replication. Genetic markers based on SSRsÐparticularly (CA)n repeatsÐhave been the workhorse of most human diseasemapping studies101,102. The availability of a comprehensive catalogue of SSRs is thus a boon for human genetic studies. The SSR catalogue also allowed us to resolve a mystery regarding mammalian genetic maps. Such genetic maps in rat, mouse and human have a de®cit of polymorphic (CA)n repeats on chromosome X30,101. There are two possible explanations for this de®cit. There may simply be fewer (CA)n repeats on chromosome X; or (CA)n repeats may be as dense on chromosome X but less polymorphic in
Table 15 SSRs by repeat unit
Repeat unit AC AT AG GC AAT AAC AGG AAG ATG CGG ACC AGC ACT ACG Number of SSRs per Mb 27.7 19.4 8.2 0.1 4.1 2.6 1.5 1.4 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.0

A remarkable feature of the human genome is the segmental duplication of portions of genomic sequence215±217. Such duplications involve the transfer of 1±200-kb blocks of genomic sequence to one or more locations in the genome. The locations of both donor and recipient regions of the genome are often not tandemly arranged, suggesting mechanisms other than unequal crossing-over for their origin. They are relatively recent, inasmuch as strong sequence identity is seen in both exons and introns (in contrast to regions that are considered to show evidence of ancient duplications, characterized by similarities only in coding regions). Indeed, many such duplications appear to have arisen in very recent evolutionary time, as judged by high sequence identity and by their absence in closely related species. Segmental duplications can be divided into two categories. First, interchromosomal duplications are de®ned as segments that are duplicated among nonhomologous chromosomes. For example, a 9.5-kb genomic segment of the adrenoleukodystrophy locus from Xq28 has been duplicated to regions near the centromeres of chromosomes 2, 10, 16 and 22 (refs 218, 219). Anecdotal observations suggest that many interchromosomal duplications map near the centromeric and telomeric regions of human chromosomes218±233. The second category is intrachromosomal duplications, which occur within a particular chromosome or chromosomal arm. This category includes several duplicated segments, also known as low copy repeat sequences, that mediate recurrent chromosomal structural rearrangements associated with genetic disease215,217. Examples on chromosome 17 include three copies of a roughly 200-kb repeat separated by around 5 Mb and two copies of a roughly 24-kb repeat separated by 1.5 Mb. The copies are so similar (99% identity) that paralogous recombination events can occur, giving rise to contiguous gene syndromes: Smith±Magenis syndrome and Charcot± Marie±Tooth syndrome 1A, respectively34,234. Several other examples are known and are also suspected to be responsible for recurrent microdeletion syndromes (for example, Prader±Willi/Angelman,

............................................................................................................................................................................. SSRs were identi®ed as in Table 14.

Figure 30 Duplication landscape of chromosome 22. The size and location of intrachromosomal (blue) and interchromosomal (red) duplications are depicted for chromosome 22q, using the PARASIGHT computer program (Bailey and Eichler, unpublished). Each horizontal line represents 1 Mb (ticks, 100-kb intervals). The chromosome sequence is oriented from centromere (top left) to telomere (bottom right). Pairwise alignments with . 90% nucleotide identity and . 1 kb long are shown. Gaps within the chromosomal sequence are of known size and shown as empty space.
889

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
velocardiofacial/DiGeorge and Williams' syndromes215,235±240). Until now, the identi®cation and characterization of segmental duplications have been based on anecdotal reportsÐfor example, ®nding that certain probes hybridize to multiple chromosomal sites or noticing duplicated sequence at certain recurrent chromosomal breakpoints. The availability of the entire genomic sequence will make it possible to explore the nature of segmental duplications more systematically. This analysis can begin with the current state of the draft genome sequence, although caution is required because some apparent duplications may arise from a failure to merge sequence contigs from overlapping clones. Alternatively, erroneous assembly of closely related sequences from nonoverlapping clones may underestimate the true frequency of such features, particularly among those segments with the highest sequence similarity. Accordingly, we adopted a conservative approach for estimating such duplication from the available draft genome sequence. Pericentromeres and subtelomeres. We began by re-evaluating the ®nished sequences of chromosomes 21 and 22. The initial papers on these chromosomes93,94 noted some instances of interchromosomal duplication near each centromere. With the ability now to compare these chromosomes to the vast majority of the genome, it is apparent that the regions near the centromeres consist almost entirely of interchromosomal duplicated segments, with little or no unique sequence. Smaller regions of interchromosomal duplication are also observed near the telomeres. Chromosome 22 contains a region of 1.5 Mb adjacent to the centromere in which 90% of sequence can now be recognized to consist of interchromosomal duplication (Fig. 30). Conversely, 52% of the interchromosomal duplications on chromosome 22 were located in this region, which comprises only 5% of the chromosome. Also, the subtelomeric end consists of a 50-kb region consisting almost entirely of interchromosomal duplications. Chromosome 21 presents a similar landscape (Fig. 31). The ®rst 1 Mb after the centromere is composed of interchromosomal repeats, as well as the largest (. 200 kb) block of intrachromosomally duplicated material. Again, most interchromosomal duplications on the chromosome map to this region and the most subtelomeric region (30 kb) shows extensive duplication among nonhomologous chromosomes.
c
100 99 98 97 96 95 94 93 92 91 90 100 99 98 97 96 95 94 93 92 91 90 100 99 98 97 96 95 94 93 92 91 90 Sequence identity (%)
100 200 300 400 500

Figure 31 Duplication landscape of chromosome 21. The size and location of intrachromosomal (blue) and interchromosomal (red) duplications are depicted along the sequence of the long arm of chromosome 21. Gaps between ®nished sequence are denoted by empty space but do not represent actual gap size.

a
Sequence identity (%)

100 99 98 97 96 95 94 93 92 91 90 100 99 98 97 96 95 94 93 92 91 90 100 99 98 97 96 95 94 93 92 91 90

100

200

300

400

500

Sequence identity (%)

Sequence identity (%)

b
100 99 98 97 96 95 94 93 92 91 90
320 340

CTR
360

CMD
380

ALD
400 420 440

d
100 99 98 97 96 95 94 93 92 91 90 100 99 98 97 96 95 94 93 92 91 90 Sequence identity (%)
100 200 300 400 500

Sequence identity

Sequence identity (%)

1,100

1,200

1,300

1,400

1,500

Sequence identity (%)

600

700

800

900

1,000

600

700

800

900

1,000

1,100

1,200

1,300

1,400

1,500

Figure 32 Mosaic patterns of duplications. Panels depict various patterns of duplication within the human genome (PARASIGHT). For each region, a segment of draft genome sequence (100±500 kb) is shown with both interchromosomal (red) and intrachromosomal (blue) duplications displayed along the horizontal line. Below the line, each separate

sequence duplication is indicated (with a distinct colour) relative to per cent nucleotide identity for the duplicated segment (y axis). Black bars show the relative locations of large blocks of heterochromatic sequences (alpha, gamma and HSAT sequence). a, An active pericentromeric region on chromosome 21. b, An ancestral region from Xq28 that has contributed various `genic' segments to pericentromeric regions. c, A pericentromeric
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

890

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

Sequence identity (%)

600

articles
The pericentromeric regions are structurally very complex, as illustrated for chromosome 21 in Fig. 32a. The pericentromeric regions appear to have been bombarded by successive insertions of duplications; the insertion events must be fairly recent because the degree of sequence conservation with the genomic source loci is fairly high (90±100%, with an apparent peak around 96%). Distinct insertions are typically separated by AT-rich or GC-rich minisatellite-like repeats that have been hypothesized to have a functional role in targeting duplications to these regions233,241. A single genomic source locus often gives rise to pericentromeric copies on multiple chromosomes, with each having essentially the same breakpoints and the same degree of divergence. An example of such a source locus on Xq28 is shown in Fig. 32b. Phylogenetic analysis has suggested a two-step mechanism for the origin and dispersal of these segments, whereby an initial segmental duplication in the pericentromeric region of one chromosome occurs and is then redistributed as part of a larger cassette to other such regions242. A comprehensive analysis for all chromosomes will have to await complete sequencing of the genome, but the evidence from the draft genome sequence indicates that the same picture is likely to be seen throughout the genome. Several papers have analysed ®nished segments within pericentromeric regions of chromosomes 2 (160 kb), 10 (400 kb) and 16 (300 kb), all of which show extensive interchromosomal segmental duplication215,219,232,233. An example from another pericentromeric region on chromosome 11 is shown in Fig. 32c. Interchromosomal duplications in subtelomeric regions also appear to be a fairly general phenomenon, as illustrated by a large tract (,500 kb) of complex duplication on chromosome 7 (Fig. 32d). The explanation for the clustering of segmental duplications may be that the genome has a damage-control mechanism whereby chromosomal breakage products are preferentially inserted into pericentromeric and, to a lesser extent, subtelomeric regions. The possibility of a speci®c mechanism for the insertion of these sequences has been suggested on the basis of the unusual sequences found ¯anking the insertions. Although it is also possible that these regions simply have greater tolerance for large insertions, many large gene-poor `deserts' have been identi®ed93 and there is no accumulation of duplicated segments within these regions. Along with the fact that transitions between duplicons (from different regions of the genome) occur at speci®c sequences, this suggests that active recruitment of duplications to such regions may occur. In any case, the duplicated regions are in general young (with many duplications showing ,6% nucleotide divergence from their source loci) and in constant ¯ux, both through additional duplications and by large-scale exchange among similar chromosomal environments. There is evidence of structural polymorphism in the human population, such as the presence or absence of olfactory receptor segments located within the telomeric regions of several human chromosomes226,227. Genome-wide analysis of segmental duplications. We also performed a global genome-wide analysis to characterize the amount of segmental duplication in the genome. We `repeat-masked' the known interspersed repeats in the draft genome sequence and compared the remaining draft genomic sequence with itself in a massive all-by-all BLASTN similarity search. We excluded matches in which the sequence identity was so high that it might re¯ect artefactual duplications resulting from a failure to overlap sequence contigs correctly in assembling the draft genome sequence. Speci®cally, we considered only matches with less than 99.5% identity for ®nished sequence and less than 98% identity for un®nished sequence. We took several approaches to avoid counting artefactual duplications in the sequence. In the ®rst approach, we studied only ®nished sequence. We compared the ®nished sequence with itself, to identify segments of at least 1 kb and 90±99.5% sequence identity. This analysis will underestimate the extent of segmental
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

duplication, because it requires that at least two copies of the segment are present in the ®nished sequence and because some true duplications have over 99.5% identity. The ®nished sequence consists of at least 3.3% segmental duplication (Table 16). Interchromosomal duplication accounts for about 1.5% and intrachromosomal duplication for about 2%, with some overlap (0.2%) between these categories. We analysed the lengths and divergence of the segmental duplications (Fig. 33). The duplications tend to be large (10±50 kb) and highly homologous, especially for the interchromosomal segments. The sequence divergence for the interchromosomal duplications appears to peak between 96.5% and 97.5%. This may indicate that interchromosomal duplications occurred in a punctuated manner. It will be intriguing to investigate whether such genomic upheaval has a role in speciation events. In a second approach, we compared the entire human draft genome sequence (®nished and un®nished) with itself to identify duplications with 90±98% sequence identity (Table 17). The draft genome sequence contains at least 3.6% segmental duplication. The actual proportion will be signi®cantly higher, because we excluded many true matches with more than 98% sequence identity (at least 1.1% of the ®nished sequence). Although exact measurement must await a ®nished sequence, the human genome seems likely to contain about 5% segmental duplication, with most of this sequence in large blocks (. 10 kb). Such a high proportion of large duplications clearly distinguishes the human genome from other sequenced genomes, such as the ¯y and worm (Table 18). The structure of large highly paralogous regions presents one of the `serious and unanticipated challenges' to producing a ®nished sequence of the genome46. The absence of unique STS or ®ngerprint signatures over large genomic distances (,1 Mb) and the high degree of sequence similarity makes the distinction between paralogous sequence variation and allelic polymorphism problematic. Furthermore, the fact that such regions frequently harbour intron± exon structures of genuine unique sequence will complicate efforts to generate a genome-wide SNP map. The data indicate that a modest portion of the human genome may be relatively recalcitrant to genomic-based methods for SNP detection. Owing to their repetitive nature and their location in the genome, segmental
Table 16 Fraction of ®nished sequence in inter- and intrachromosomal duplications
Chromosome 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 X Y Un Total Intrachromosomal (%) 1.4 0.1 0.3 0.0 0.6 0.8 3.4 0.3 0.8 2.1 1.2 1.5 0.0 0.6 3.0 4.5 1.6 0.0 3.6 0.2 1.4 6.1 1.8 12.1 0.0 2.0 Interchromosomal (%) 0.5 0.6 1.1 1.0 0.3 0.4 1.3 0.1 2.9 0.8 2.1 0.3 0.5 0.4 6.9 2.0 0.3 0.7 0.3 0.3 1.6 2.6 3.2 16.0 0.5 1.5 All (%) 1.9 0.7 1.1 1.0 0.9 1.1 4.1 0.3 3.7 2.9 2.3 1.8 0.5 1.0 6.9 5.8 1.8 0.7 3.8 0.5 3.0 7.5 5.0 27.4 0.5 3.3

............................................................................................................................................................................. Excludes duplications with identities .99.5% to avoid artefactual duplication due to incomplete merger in the assembly process. Calculation was performed on the ®nished sequence available in September 2000 and re¯ects the duplications found within the total amount of ®nished sequence then. Note that there is some overlap between the interchromosomal and intrachromosomal sets.

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

891

articles
a
Sum of aligned bases (kb) Intrachromosomal 900,000 800,000 700,000 600,000 500,000 400,000 300,000 200,000 100,000 0
90 90.5 91 91.5 92 92.5 93 93.5 94 94.5 95 95.5 96 96.5 97 97.5 98 98.5 99

b
Sum of aligned bases (kb) 1,600,000 1,400,000 1,200,000 1,000,000 800,000 600,000 400,000 200,000 0

Interchromosomal

90 90.5 91 91.5 92 92.5 93 93.5 94 94.5 95 95.5 96 96.5 97 97.5 98 98.5 99

c
Sum of aligned bases (kb)

Similarity (%) 1,200,000 1,000,000 800,000 600,000 400,000 200,000 0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10­19 20­29 30­39 40­49 50+

d
Sum of aligned bases (kb)

Similarity (%) 4,000,000 3,500,000 3,000,000 2,500,000 2,000,000 1,500,000 1,000,000 500,000 0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10­19 20­29 30­39 40­49 50+

Length of alignment (kb)

Length of alignment (kb)

Figure 33 a±d, Sequence properties of segmental duplications. Distributions of length and per cent nucleotide identity for segmental duplications are shown as a function of the

number of aligned bp, for the subset of ®nished genome sequence. Intrachromosomal, red; interchromosomal, blue.

duplications may well be underestimated by the current analysis. An understanding of the biology, pathology and evolution of these duplications will require specialized efforts within these exceptional regions of the human genome. The presence and distribution of such segments may provide evolutionary fodder for processes of exon shuf¯ing and a general increase in protein diversity associated with domain accretion. It will be important to consider both genome-wide duplication events and more restricted punctuated events of genome duplication as forces in the evolution of vertebrate genomes.

Gene content of the human genome
Genes (or at least their coding regions) comprise only a tiny fraction of human DNA, but they represent the major biological function of the genome and the main focus of interest by biologists. They are also the most challenging feature to identify in the human genome sequence. The ultimate goal is to compile a complete list of all human genes and their encoded proteins, to serve as a `periodic table' for biomedical research243. But this is a dif®cult task. In organisms with small genomes, it is straightforward to identify most genes by the presence of long ORFs. In contrast, human genes tend to have small exons (encoding an average of only 50 codons) separated by long introns (some exceeding 10 kb). This creates a signal-to-noise problem, with the result that computer programs for direct gene prediction have only limited accuracy. Instead, computational prediction of human genes must rely largely on the availability of cDNA sequences or on sequence conservation with genes and proteins from other organisms. This approach is adequate for strongly conserved genes (such as histones or ubiquitin), but may be less sensitive to rapidly evolving genes (including many crucial to speciation, sex determination and fertilization). Here we describe our efforts to recognize both the RNA genes and protein-coding genes in the human genome. We also study the properties of the predicted human protein set, attempting to discern how the human proteome differs from those of invertebrates such as worm and ¯y.
Noncoding RNAs

Table 17 Fraction of the draft genome sequence in inter- and intrachromosomal duplications
Chromosome 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 X Y NA UL Total Intrachromosomal (%) 2.1 1.6 1.8 1.5 1.0 1.5 3.6 1.2 2.1 3.3 2.7 2.1 1.7 0.6 4.1 3.4 4.4 0.9 5.4 0.8 1.9 6.8 1.2 10.9 2.3 11.6 2.3 Interchromosomal (%) 1.7 1.6 1.4 2.2 0.9 1.4 1.8 1.5 2.3 2.0 1.4 1.2 1.6 0.6 4.4 3.4 1.7 1.0 1.6 1.4 4.0 7.7 1.1 13.1 7.8 20.8 2.0 All (%) 3.4 2.6 2.7 3.0 1.8 2.7 4.5 2.1 3.8 4.7 3.7 2.8 3.0 1.2 6.7 5.5 5.7 1.9 6.3 2.0 4.8 11.9 2.2 20.8 8.3 22.2 3.6

Although biologists often speak of a tight coupling between `genes
Table 18 Cross-species comparison for large, highly homologous segmental duplications
Percentage of genome (%) Fly . 1 kb . 5 kb . 10 kb 1.2 0.37 0.08 Worm 4.25 1.50 0.66 Human (®nished)* 3.25 2.86 2.52

............................................................................................................................................................................. Excludes duplications with identities .98% to avoid artefactual duplication due to incomplete merger in the assembly process. Calculation was performed on an earlier version of the draft genome sequence based on data available in July 2000 and re¯ects the duplications found within the total amount of ®nished sequence then. Note that there is some overlap between the interchromosomal and intrachromosomal sets.

............................................................................................................................................................................. * This is an underestimate of the total amount of segmental duplication in the human genome because it only re¯ects duplication detectable with available ®nished sequence. The proportion of segmental duplications of . 1 kb is probably about 5% (see text).

892

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

articles
and their encoded protein products', it is important to remember that thousands of human genes produce noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) as their ultimate product244. There are several major classes of ncRNA. (1) Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are the adapters that translate the triplet nucleic acid code of RNA into the amino-acid sequence of proteins; (2) ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) are also central to the translational machinery, and recent X-ray crystallography results strongly indicate that peptide bond formation is catalysed by rRNA, not protein245,246; (3) small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are required for rRNA processing and base modi®cation in the nucleolus247,248; and (4) small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) are critical components of spliceosomes, the large ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes that splice introns out of pre-mRNAs in the nucleus. Humans have both a major, U2 snRNA-dependent spliceosome that splices most introns, and a minor, U12 snRNA-dependent spliceosome that splices a rare class of introns that often have AT/AC dinucleotides at the splice sites instead of the canonical GT/AG splice site consensus249. Other ncRNAs include both RNAs of known biochemical function (such as telomerase RNA and the 7SL signal recognition particle RNA) and ncRNAs of enigmatic function (such as the large Xist transcript implicated in X dosage compensation250, or the small vault RNAs found in the bizarre vault ribonucleoprotein complex251, which is three times the mass of the ribosome but has unknown function). ncRNAs do not have translated ORFs, are often small and are not polyadenylated. Accordingly, novel ncRNAs cannot readily be found by computational gene-®nding techniques (which search for features such as ORFs) or experimental sequencing of cDNA or EST libraries (most of which are prepared by reverse transcription using a primer complementary to a poly(A) tail). Even if the complete ®nished sequence of the human genome were available, discovering novel ncRNAs would still be challenging. We can, however, identify genomic sequences that are homologous to known ncRNA genes, using BLASTN or, in some cases, more specialized methods. It is sometimes dif®cult to tell whether such homologous genes are orthologues, paralogues or closely related pseudogenes (because inactivating mutations are much less obvious than for proteincoding genes). For tRNA, there is suf®ciently detailed information about the cloverleaf secondary structure to allow true genes and pseudogenes to be distinguished with high sensitivity. For many other ncRNAs, there is much less structural information and so we employ an operational criterion of high sequence similarity (. 95% sequence identity and . 95% full length) to distinguish true genes from pseudogenes. These assignments will eventually need to be reconciled with experimental data. Transfer RNA genes. The classical experimental estimate of the number of human tRNA genes is 1,310 (ref. 252). In the draft genome sequence, we ®nd only 497 human tRNA genes (Tables 19, 20). How do we account for this discrepancy? We believe that the original estimate is likely to have been in¯ated in two respects. First, it came from a hybridization experiment that probably counted closely related pseudogenes; by analysis of the draft genome sequence, there are in fact 324 tRNA-derived putative pseudogenes
Table 19 Number of tRNA genes in various organisms
Organism Human Worm Fly Yeast Methanococcus jannaschii Escherichia coli Number of canonical tRNAs 497 584 284 273 36 86 SeCys tRNA 1 1 1 0 1 1

............................................................................................................................................................................. Number of tRNA genes in each of six genome sequences, according to analysis by the computer program tRNAscan-SE . Canonical tRNAs read one of the standard 61 sense codons; this category excludes pseudogenes, undetermined anticodons, putative supressors and selenocysteine tRNAs. Most organisms have a selenocysteine (SeCys) tRNA species, but some unicellular eukaryotes do not (such as the yeast S. cerevisiae).

(Table 20). Second, the earlier estimate assumed too high a value for the size of the human genome; repeating the calculation using the correct value yields an estimate of about 890 tRNA-related loci, which is in reasonable accord with our count of 821 tRNA genes and pseudogenes in the draft genome sequence. The human tRNA gene set predicted from the draft genome sequence appears to include most of the known human tRNA species. The draft genome sequence contains 37 of 38 human tRNA species listed in a tRNA database253, allowing for up to one mismatch. This includes one copy of the known gene for a specialized selenocysteine tRNA, one of several components of a baroque translational mechanism that reads UGA as a selenocysteine codon in certain rare mRNAs that carry a speci®c cis-acting RNA regulatory site (a so-called SECIS element) in their 39 UTRs. The one tRNA gene in the database not found in the draft genome sequence is DE9990, a tRNAGlu species, which differs in two positions from the most related tRNA gene in the human genome. Possible explanations are that the database version of this tRNA contains two errors, the gene is polymorphic or this is a genuine functional tRNA that is missing from the draft genome sequence. (The database also lists one additional tRNA gene (DS9994), but this is apparently a contaminant, most similar to bacterial tRNAs; the parent entry (Z13399) was withdrawn from the DNA database, but the tRNA entry has not yet been removed from the tRNA database.) Although the human set appears substantially complete by this test, the tRNA gene numbers in Table 19 should be considered tentative and used with caution. The human and ¯y (but not the worm) are known to be missing signi®cant amounts of heterochromatic DNA, and additional tRNA genes could be located there. With this caveat, the results indicate that the human has fewer tRNA genes than the worm, but more than the ¯y. This may seem surprising, but tRNA gene number in metazoans is thought to be related not to organismal complexity, but more to idiosyncrasies of the demand for tRNA abundance in certain tissues or stages of embryonic development. For example, the frog Xenopus laevis, which must load each oocyte with a remarkable 40 ng of tRNA, has thousands of tRNA genes254. The degeneracy of the genetic code has allowed an inspired economy of tRNA anticodon usage. Although 61 sense codons need to be decoded, not all 61 different anticodons are present in tRNAs. Rather, tRNAs generally follow stereotyped and conserved wobble rules255±257. Wobble reduces the number of required anticodons substantially, and provides a connection between the genetic code and the hybridization stability of modi®ed and unmodi®ed RNA bases. In eukaryotes, the rules proposed by Guthrie and Abelson256 predict that about 46 tRNA species will be suf®cient to read the 61 sense codons (counting the initiator and elongator methionine tRNAs as two species). According to these rules, in the codon's third (wobble) position, U and C are generally decoded by a single tRNA species, whereas A and G are decoded by two separate tRNA species. In `two-codon boxes' of the genetic code (where codons ending with U/C encode a different amino acid from those ending with A/G), the U/C wobble position should be decoded by a G at position 34 in the tRNA anticodon. Thus, in the top left of Fig. 34, there is no tRNA with an AAA anticodon for Phe, but the GAA anticodon can recognize both UUU and UUC codons in the mRNA. In `fourcodon boxes' of the genetic code (where U, C, A and G in the wobble position all encode the same amino acid), the U/C wobble position is almost always decoded by I34 (inosine) in the tRNA, where the inosine is produced by post-transcriptional modi®cation of an adenine (A). In the bottom left of Fig. 34, for example, the GUU and GUC codons of the four-codon Val box are decoded by a tRNA with an anticodon of AAC, which is no doubt modi®ed to IAC. Presumably this pattern, which is strikingly conserved in eukaryotes, has to do with the fact that IA base pairs are also possible; thus
893

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
the IAC anticodon for a Val tRNA could recognize GUU, GUC and even GUA codons. Were this same I34 to be utilized in two-codon boxes, however, misreading of the NNA codon would occur, resulting in translational havoc. Eukaryotic glycine tRNAs represent a conserved exception to this last rule; they use a GCC anticodon to decode GGU and GGC, rather than the expected ICC anticodon. Satisfyingly, the human tRNA set follows these wobble rules almost perfectly (Fig. 34). Only three unexpected tRNA species are found: single genes for a tRNATyr-AUA, tRNAIle-GAU, and tRNAAsn-AUU. Perhaps these are pseudogenes, but they appear to be plausible tRNAs. We also checked the possibility of sequencing errors in their anticodons, but each of these three genes is in a region of high sequence accuracy, with PHRAP quality scores higher than 70 for every base in their anticodons. As in all other organisms, human protein-coding genes show codon biasÐpreferential use of one synonymous codon over another258 (Fig. 34). In less complex organisms, such as yeast or bacteria, highly expressed genes show the strongest codon bias. Cytoplasmic abundance of tRNA species is correlated with both codon bias and overall amino-acid frequency (for example, tRNAs for preferred codons and for more common amino acids are more abundant). This is presumably driven by selective pressure for ef®cient or accurate translation259. In many organisms, tRNA abundance in turn appears to be roughly correlated with tRNA gene copy number, so tRNA gene copy number has been used as a proxy for tRNA abundance260. In vertebrates, however, codon bias is not so obviously correlated with gene expression level. Differing codon biases between human genes is more a function of their location in regions of different GC composition261. In agreement with the literature, we see only a very rough correlation of human tRNA gene number with either amino-acid frequency or codon bias (Fig. 34). The most obvious outliers in these weak correlations are
171 UUU Phe 203 UUC 73 UUA Leu 125 UUG CAA 6 45 UCG CGA 4 stop 0 UAG CUA 0 Trp 122 UGG CCA 7 GAA 14 Ser UAA 8 118 UCA UGA 5 172 UCC GGA 0 stop AAA 0 147 UCU AGA 10 Tyr 158 UAC 0 UAA GUA 11 UUA 0 stop

the strongly preferred CUG leucine codon, with a mere six tRNALeu-CAG genes producing a tRNA to decode it, and the relatively rare cysteine UGU and UGC codons, with 30 tRNA genes to decode them. The tRNA genes are dispersed throughout the human genome. However, this dispersal is nonrandom. tRNA genes have sometimes been seen in clusters at small scales262,263 but we can now see striking clustering on a genome-wide scale. More than 25% of the tRNA genes (140) are found in a region of only about 4 Mb on chromosome 6. This small region, only about 0.1% of the genome, contains an almost suf®cient set of tRNA genes all by itself. The 140 tRNA genes contain a representative for 36 of the 49 anticodons found in the complete set; and of the 21 isoacceptor types, only tRNAs to decode Asn, Cys, Glu and selenocysteine are missing. Many of these tRNA genes, meanwhile, are clustered elsewhere; 18 of the 30 Cys tRNAs are found in a 0.5-Mb stretch of chromosome 7 and many of the Asn and Glu tRNA genes are loosely clustered on chromosome 1. More than half of the tRNA genes (280 out of 497) reside on either chromosome 1 or chromosome 6. Chromosomes 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 12, 18, 20, 21 and X appear to have fewer than 10 tRNA genes each; and chromosomes 22 and Y have none at all (each has a single pseudogene). Ribosomal RNA genes. The ribosome, the protein synthetic machine of the cell, is made up of two subunits and contains four rRNA species and many proteins. The large ribosomal subunit contains 28S and 5.8S rRNAs (collectively called `large subunit' (LSU) rRNA) and also a 5S rRNA. The small ribosomal subunit contains 18S rRNA (`small subunit' (SSU) rRNA). The genes for LSU and SSU rRNA occur in the human genome as a 44-kb tandem repeat unit264. There are thought to be about 150±200 copies of this repeat unit arrayed on the short arms of acrocentric chromosomes 13, 14, 15, 21 and 22 (refs 254, 264). There are no true complete
124 UAU AUA 1 Cys 119 UGC 0 UGA GCA 30 UCA 0 99 UGU ACA 0

127 CUU 187 CUC Leu 69 CUA 392 CUG

AAG 13 GAG 0 Pro UAG 2 CAG 6

175 CCU 197 CCC 170 CCA 69 CCG

AGG 11 His GGG 0 UGG 10 Gln CGG 4

104 CAU 147 CAC 121 CAA 343 CAG

AUG 0 GUG 12 Arg UUG 11 CUG 21

47 CGU 107 CGC 63 CGA 115 CGG

ACG 9 GCG 0 UCG 7 CCG 5

165 AUU Ile 218 AUC 71 AUA Met 221 AUG

AAU 13 GAU 1 Thr UAU 5 CAU 17

131 ACU 192 ACC 150 ACA 63 ACG

AGU 8 Asn GGU 0 UGU 10 Lys CGU 7

174 AAU 199 AAC 248 AAA 331 AAG

AUU 1 Ser GUU 33 UUU 16 Arg CUU 22

121 AGU 191 AGC 113 AGA 110 AGG

ACU 0 GCU 7 UCU 5 CCU 4

111 GUU 146 GUC Val 72 GUA 288 GUG

AAC 20 GAC 0 Ala UAC 5 CAC 19

185 GCU 282 GCC 160 GCA 74 GCG

AGC 25 Asp GGC 0 UGC 10 Glu CGC 5

230 GAU 262 GAC 301 GAA 404 GAG

AUC 0 GUC 10 Gly UUC 14 CUC 8

112 GGU 230 GGC 168 GGA 160 GGG

ACC 0 GCC 11 UCC 5 CCC 8

Figure 34 The human genetic code and associated tRNA genes. For each of the 64 codons, we show: the corresponding amino acid; the observed frequency of the codon per 10,000 codons; the codon; predicted wobble pairing to a tRNA anticodon (black lines); an unmodi®ed tRNA anticodon sequence; and the number of tRNA genes found with this anticodon. For example, phenylalanine is encoded by UUU or UUC; UUC is seen more frequently, 203 to 171 occurrences per 10,000 total codons; both codons are expected to be decoded by a single tRNA anticodon type, GAA, using a G/U wobble; and there are 14
894

tRNA genes found with this anticodon. The modi®ed anticodon sequence in the mature tRNA is not shown, even where post-transcriptional modi®cations can be con®dently predicted (for example, when an A is used to decode a U/C third position, the A is almost certainly an inosine in the mature tRNA). The Figure also does not show the number of distinct tRNA species (such as distinct sequence families) for each anticodon; often there is more than one species for each anticodon.

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

articles
copies of the rDNA tandem repeats in the draft genome sequence, owing to the deliberate bias in the initial phase of the sequencing effort against sequencing BAC clones whose restriction fragment ®ngerprints showed them to contain primarily tandemly repeated sequence. Sequence similarity analysis with the BLASTN computer program does, however, detect hundreds of rDNA-derived sequence fragments dispersed throughout the complete genome, including one `full-length' copy of an individual 5.8S rRNA gene not associated with a true tandem repeat unit (Table 20). The 5S rDNA genes also occur in tandem arrays, the largest of which is on chromosome 1 between 1q41.11 and 1q42.13, close to the telomere265,266. There are 200±300 true 5S genes in these arrays265,267. The number of 5S-related sequences in the genome, including numerous dispersed pseudogenes, is classically cited as 2,000 (refs 252, 254). The long tandem array on chromosome 1 is not yet present in the draft genome sequence because there are no EcoRI or HindIII sites present, and thus it was not cloned in the most heavily utilized BAC libraries (Table 1). We expect to recover it during the ®nishing stage. We do detect four individual copies of 5S rDNA by our search criteria ($ 95% identity and $ 95% full length). We also ®nd many more distantly related dispersed sequences (520 at P # 0.001), which we interpret as probable pseudogenes (Table 20). Small nucleolar RNA genes. Eukaryotic rRNA is extensively processed and modi®ed in the nucleolus. Much of this activity is directed by numerous snoRNAs. These come in two families: C/D box snoRNAs (mostly involved in guiding site-speci®c 29-O-ribose methylations of other RNAs) and H/ACA snoRNAs (mostly involved in guiding site-speci®c pseudouridylations)247,248. We compiled a set of 97 known human snoRNA gene sequences; 84 of these (87%) have at least one copy in the draft genome sequence (Table 20), almost all as single-copy genes. It is thought that all 29-O-ribose methylations and pseudouridylations in eukaryotic rRNA are guided by snoRNAs. There are 105±107 methylations and around 95 pseudouridylations in human
Table 20 Known non-coding RNA genes in the draft genome sequence
RNA gene* tRNA SSU (18S) rRNA 5.8S rRNA LSU (28S) rRNA 5S rRNA U1 U2 U4 U4atac U5 U6 U6atac U7 U11 U12 SRP (7SL) RNA RNAse P RNAse MRP Telomerase RNA hY1 hY3 hY4 hY5 (4.5S RNA) Vault RNAs 7SK H19 Xist Known C/D snoRNAs Known H/ACA snoRNAs Number expected² 1,310 150±200 150±200 150±200 200±300 ,30 10±20 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? 1 1 1 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 1 1 1 81 16 Number found³ 497 0 1 0 4 16 6 4 1 1 44 4 1 0 1 3 1 1 1 1 25 3 1 3 1 1 1 69 15 Number of related genes§ 324 40 11 181 520 134 94 87 20 31 1,135 32 3 6 0 773 2 6 4 353 414 115 9 1 330 2 0 558 87 Function Protein synthesis Protein synthesis Protein synthesis Protein synthesis Protein synthesis Spliceosome component Spliceosome component Spliceosome component Component of minor (U11/U12) spliceosome Spliceosome component Spliceosome component Component of minor (U11/U12) spliceosome Histone mRNA 39 processing Component of minor (U11/U12) spliceosome Component of minor (U11/U12) spliceosome Component of signal recognition particle (protein secretion) tRNA 59 end processing rRNA processing Template for addition of telomeres Component of Ro RNP, function unknown Component of Ro RNP, function unknown Component of Ro RNP, function unknown Component of Ro RNP, function unknown Component of 13-MDa vault RNP, function unknown Unknown Unknown Initiation of X chromosome inactivation (dosage compensation) Pre-rRNA processing or site-speci®c ribose methylation of rRNA Pre-rRNA processing or site-speci®c pseudouridylation of rRNA

rRNA268. Only about half of these have been tentatively assigned to known guide snoRNAs. There are also snoRNA-directed modi®cations on other stable RNAs, such as U6 (ref. 269), and the extent of this is just beginning to be explored. Sequence similarity has so far proven insuf®cient to recognize all snoRNA genes. We therefore expect that there are many unrecognized snoRNA genes that are not detected by BLAST queries. Spliceosomal RNAs and other ncRNA genes. We also looked for copies of other known ncRNA genes. We found at least one copy of 21 (95%) of 22 known ncRNAs, including the spliceosomal snRNAs. There were multiple copies for several ncRNAs, as expected; for example, we ®nd 44 dispersed genes for U6 snRNA, and 16 for U1 snRNA (Table 20). For some of these RNA genes, homogeneous multigene families that occur in tandem arrays are again under-represented owing to the restriction enzymes used in constructing the BAC libraries and, in some instances, the decision to delay the sequencing of BAC clones with low complexity ®ngerprints indicative of tandemly repeated DNA. The U2 RNA genes are located at the RNU2 locus, a tandem array of 10±20 copies of nearly identical 6.1-kb units at 17q21±q22 (refs 270±272). Similarly, the U3 snoRNA genes (included in the aggregate count of C/D snoRNAs in Table 20) are clustered at the RNU3 locus at 17p11.2, not in a tandem array, but in a complex inverted repeat structure of about 5±10 copies per haploid genome273. The U1 RNA genes are clustered with about 30 copies at the RNU1 locus at 1p36.1, but this cluster is thought to be loose and irregularly organized; no two U1 genes have been cloned on the same cosmid271. In the draft genome sequence, we see six copies of U2 RNA that meet our criteria for true genes, three of which appear to be in the expected position on chromosome 17. For U3, so far we see one true copy at the correct place on chromosome 17p11.2. For U1, we see 16 true genes, 6 of which are loosely clustered within 0.6 Mb at 1p36.1 and another 6 are elsewhere on chromosome 1. Again, these and other clusters will be a matter for the ®nishing process.

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... * Known ncRNA genes (or gene families, such as the C/D and H/ACA snoRNA families); reference sequences were extracted from GenBank and used to probe the draft genome sequence. ² Number of genes that were expected in the human genome, based on previous literature (note that earlier experimental techniques probably tend to overestimate copy number, by counting closely related pseudogenes). ³ The copy number of `true' full-length genes identi®ed in the draft genome sequence. § The copy number of other signi®cantly related copies (pseudogenes, fragments, paralogues) found. Except for the 497 true tRNA genes, all sequence similarities were identi®ed by WashU BLASTN 2.0MP (W. Gish, unpublished; http://blast.wustl.edu), with parameters `-kap wordmask = seg B = 50000 W = 8' and the default +5/-4 DNA scoring matrix. True genes were operationally de®ned as BLAST hits with $ 95% identity over $ 95% of the length of the query. Related sequences were operationally de®ned as all other BLAST hits with P-values # 0.001.

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

895

articles
Table 21 Characteristics of human genes
Median Internal exon Exon number Introns 39 UTR 59 UTR Coding sequence (CDS) Genomic extent 122 bp 7 1,023 bp 400 bp 240 bp 1,100 bp 367 aa 14 kb Mean 145 bp 8.8 3,365 bp 770 bp 300 bp 1,340 bp 447 aa 27 kb Sample (size) RefSeq alignments to draft genome sequence, with con®rmed intron boundaries (43,317 exons) RefSeq alignments to ®nished sequence (3,501 genes) RefSeq alignments to ®nished sequence (27,238 introns) Con®rmed by mRNA or EST on chromosome 22 (689) Con®rmed by mRNA or EST on chromosome 22 (463) Selected RefSeq entries (1,804) Selected RefSeq entries (1,804)

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... Median and mean values for a number of properties of human protein-coding genes. The 1,804 selected RefSeq entries were those that could be unambiguously aligned to ®nished sequence over their entire length.

Percentage of exons

Protein-coding genes

Our observations also con®rm the striking proliferation of ncRNA-derived pseudogenes (Table 20). There are hundreds or thousands of sequences in the draft genome sequence related to some of the ncRNA genes. The most proli®c pseudogene counts generally come from RNA genes transcribed by RNA polymerase III promoters, including U6, the hY RNAs and SRP-RNA. These ncRNA pseudogenes presumably arise through reverse transcription. The frequency of such events gives insight into how ncRNA genes can evolve into SINE retroposons, such as the tRNA-derived SINEs found in many vertebrates and the SRP-RNA-derived Alu elements found in humans.

underestimates. In particular, the UTRs given in the RefSeq database are likely to be incomplete; they are considerably shorter, for example, than those derived from careful reconstructions on chromosome 22. Intron sizes were measured only for genes in ®nished genomic sequence, to mitigate the bias arising from the fact that
a
7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 Exon length (bp) 700 800 900 1,000
Human Worm Fly

Identifying the protein-coding genes in the human genome is one of the most important applications of the sequence data, but also one of the most dif®cult challenges. We describe below our efforts to create an initial human gene and protein index. Exploring properties of known genes. Before attempting to identify new genes, we explored what could be learned by aligning the cDNA sequences of known genes to the draft genome sequence. Genomic alignments allow one to study exon±intron structure and local GC content, and are valuable for biomedical studies because they connect genes with the genetic and cytogenetic map, link them with regulatory sequences and facilitate the development of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers to amplify exons. Until now, genomic alignment was available for only about a quarter of known genes. The `known' genes studied were those in the RefSeq database110, a manually curated collection designed to contain nonredundant representatives of most full-length human mRNA sequences in GenBank (RefSeq intentionally contains some alternative splice forms of the same genes). The version of RefSeq used contained 10,272 mRNAs. The RefSeq genes were aligned with the draft genome sequence, using both the Spidey (S. Wheelan, personal communication) and Acembly (D. Thierry-Mieg and J. Thierry-Mieg, unpublished; http://www.acedb.org) computer programs. Because this sequence is incomplete and contains errors, not all genes could be fully aligned and some may have been incorrectly aligned. More than 92% of the RefSeq entries could be aligned at high stringency over at least part of their length, and 85% could be aligned over more than half of their length. Some genes (16%) had high stringency alignments to more than one location in the draft genome sequence owing, for example, to paralogues or pseudogenes. In such cases, we considered only the best match. In a few of these cases, the assignment may not be correct because the true matching region has not yet been sequenced. Three per cent of entries appeared to be alternative splice products of the same gene, on the basis of their alignment to the same location in the draft genome sequence. In all, we obtained at least partial genomic alignments for 9,212 distinct known genes and essentially complete alignment for 5,364 of them. Previous efforts to study human gene structure116,274,275 have been hampered by limited sample sizes and strong biases in favour of compact genes. Table 21 gives the mean and median values of some basic characteristics of gene structures. Some of the values may be
896

b 60
50 Percentage of introns 40 30 20 10 0 <100 bp 101 bp­2 kb 2 kb­5 kb Intron length 5­30 kb >30 kb
Human Worm Fly

c 25
20 Percentage of introns
Human Worm Fly

15

10

5

0

0

20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 Intron length (bp)

Figure 35 Size distributions of exons, introns and short introns, in sequenced genomes. a, Exons; b, introns; c, short introns (enlarged from b). Con®rmed exons and introns for the human were taken from RefSeq alignments and for worm and ¯y from Acembly alignments of ESTs (J. and D. Thierry-Mieg and, for worm, Y. Kohara, unpublished).
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
long introns are more likely than short introns to be interrupted by gaps in the draft genome sequence. Nonetheless, there may be some residual bias against long genes and long introns. There is considerable variation in overall gene size and intron size, with both distributions having very long tails. Many genes are over 100 kb long, the largest known example being the dystrophin gene (DMD) at 2.4 Mb. The variation in the size distribution of coding sequences and exons is less extreme, although there are still some remarkable outliers. The titin gene276 has the longest currently known coding sequence at 80,780 bp; it also has the largest number of exons (178) and longest single exon (17,106 bp). It is instructive to compare the properties of human genes with those from worm and ¯y. For all three organisms, the typical length of a coding sequence is similar (1,311 bp for worm, 1,497 bp for ¯y and 1,340 bp for human), and most internal exons fall within a common peak between 50 and 200 bp (Fig. 35a). However, the worm and ¯y exon distributions have a fatter tail, resulting in a larger mean size for internal exons (218 bp for worm versus 145 bp for human). The conservation of preferred exon size across all three species supports suggestions of a conserved exon-based component of the splicing machinery277. Intriguingly, the few extremely short human exons show an unusual base composition. In 42 detected
a 0.20
0.18 0.16 Relative gene density 0.30 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38 0.40 0.42 0.44 0.46 0.48 0.50 0.52 0.54 0.56 0.58 0.60 0.62 0.64 0.66 0.68 0.70 0.14 Frequency 0.12 0.10 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.02 0.00
Genome Genes

human exons of less than 19 bp, the nucleotide frequencies of A, G, T and C are 39, 33, 15 and 12%, respectively, showing a strong purine bias. Purine-rich sequences may enhance splicing278,279, and it is possible that such sequences are required or strongly selected for to ensure correct splicing of very short exons. Previous studies have shown that short exons require intronic, but not exonic, splicing enhancers280. In contrast to the exons, the intron size distributions differ substantially among the three species (Fig. 35b, c). The worm and ¯y each have a reasonably tight distribution, with most introns near the preferred minimum intron length (47 bp for worm, 59 bp for ¯y) and an extended tail (overall average length of 267 bp for worm and 487 bp for ¯y). Intron size is much more variable in humans, with a peak at 87 bp but a very long tail resulting in a mean of more than 3,300 bp. The variation in intron size results in great variation in gene size. The variation in gene size and intron size can partly be explained by the fact that GC-rich regions tend to be gene-dense with many compact genes, whereas AT-rich regions tend to be gene-poor with many sprawling genes containing large introns. The correlation of gene density with GC content is shown in Fig. 36a, b; the relative density increases more than tenfold as GC content increases from
b 20
18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.30 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38 0.40 0.42 0.44 0.46 0.48 0.50 0.52 0.54 0.56 0.58 0.60 0.62 0.64 0.66 0.68 0.70 0

GC content

GC content

c 2,500
140 2,000 Median intron length 120 100 1,500 80 1,000 60 40 500 20
Intron Exon

0 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5 GC content 0.55 0.6 0.65

0

Figure 36 GC content. a, Distribution of GC content in genes and in the genome. For 9,315 known genes mapped to the draft genome sequence, the local GC content was calculated in a window covering either the whole alignment or 20,000 bp centred around the midpoint of the alignment, whichever was larger. Ns in the sequence were not counted. GC content for the genome was calculated for adjacent nonoverlapping 20,000bp windows across the sequence. Both the gene and genome distributions have been
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

normalized to sum to one. b, Gene density as a function of GC content, obtained by taking the ratio of the data in a. Values are less accurate at higher GC levels because the denominator is small. c, Dependence of mean exon and intron lengths on GC content. For exons and introns, the local GC content was derived from alignments to ®nished sequence only, and were calculated from windows covering the feature or 10,000 bp centred on the feature, whichever was larger.
897

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

Median exon length

articles
30% to 50%. The correlation appears to be due primarily to intron size, which drops markedly with increasing GC content (Fig. 36c). In contrast, coding properties such as exon length (Fig. 36c) or exon number (data not shown) vary little. Intergenic distance is also probably lower in high-GC areas, although this is hard to prove directly until all genes have been identi®ed. The large number of con®rmed human introns allows us to analyse variant splice sites, con®rming and extending recent reports281. Intron positions were con®rmed by applying a stringent criterion that EST or mRNA sequence show an exact match of 8 bp in the ¯anking exonic sequence on each side. Of 53,295 con®rmed introns, 98.12% use the canonical dinucleotides GT at the 59 splice site and AG at the 39 site (GT±AG pattern). Another 0.76% use the related GC±AG. About 0.10% use AT±AC, which is a rare alternative pattern primarily recognized by the variant U12 splicing machinery282. The remaining 1% belong to 177 types, some of which undoubtedly re¯ect sequencing or alignment errors. Finally, we looked at alternative splicing of human genes. Alternative splicing can allow many proteins to be produced from a single gene and can be used for complex gene regulation. It appears to be prevalent in humans, with lower estimates of about 35% of human genes being subject to alternative splicing283±285. These studies may have underestimated the prevalence of alternative splicing, because they examined only EST alignments covering only a portion of a gene. To investigate the prevalence of alternative splicing, we analysed reconstructed mRNA transcripts covering the entire coding regions of genes on chromosome 22 (omitting small genes with coding regions of less than 240 bp). Potential transcripts identi®ed by alignments of ESTs and cDNAs to genomic sequence were veri®ed by human inspection. We found 642 transcripts, covering 245 genes (average of 2.6 distinct transcripts per gene). Two or more alternatively spliced transcripts were found for 145 (59%) of these genes. A similar analysis for the gene-rich chromosome 19 gave 1,859 transcripts, corresponding to 544 genes (average 3.2 distinct transcripts per gene). Because we are sampling only a subset of all transcripts, the true extent of alternative splicing is likely to be greater. These ®gures are considerably higher than those for worm, in which analysis reveals alternative splicing for 22% of genes for which ESTs have been found, with an average of 1.34 (12,816/9,516) splice variants per gene. (The apparently higher extent of alternative splicing seen in human than in worm was not an artefact resulting from much deeper coverage of human genes by ESTs and mRNAs. Although there are many times more ESTs available for human than worm, these ESTs tend to have shorter average length (because many were the product of early sequencing efforts) and many match no human genes. We calculated the actual coverage per bp used in the analysis of the human and worm genes; the coverage is only modestly higher (about 50%) for the human, with a strong bias towards 39 UTRs which tend to show much less alternative splicing. We also repeated the analysis using equal coverage for the two organisms and con®rmed that higher levels of alternative splicing were still seen in human.) Seventy per cent of alternative splice forms found in the genes on chromosomes 19 and 22 affect the coding sequence, rather than merely changing the 39 or 59 UTR. (This estimate may be affected by the incomplete representation of UTRs in the RefSeq database and in the transcripts studied.) Alternative splicing of the terminal exon was seen for 20% of 6,105 mRNAs that were aligned to the draft genome sequence and correspond to con®rmed 39 EST clusters. In addition to alternative splicing, we found evidence of the terminal exon employing alternative polyadenylation sites (separated by . 100 bp) in 24% of cases. Towards a complete index of human genes. We next focused on creating an initial index of human genes and proteins. This index is quite incomplete, owing to the dif®culty of gene identi®cation in human DNA and the imperfect state of the draft genome sequence.
898

Nonetheless, it is valuable for experimental studies and provides important insights into the nature of human genes and proteins. The challenge of identifying genes from genomic sequence varies greatly among organisms. Gene identi®cation is almost trivial in bacteria and yeast, because the absence of introns in bacteria and their paucity in yeast means that most genes can be readily recognized by ab initio analysis as unusually long ORFs. It is not as simple, but still relatively straightforward, to identify genes in animals with small genomes and small introns, such as worm and ¯y. A major factor is the high signal-to-noise ratioÐcoding sequences comprise a large proportion of the genome and a large proportion of each gene (about 50% for worm and ¯y), and exons are relatively large. Gene identi®cation is more dif®cult in human DNA. The signalto-noise ratio is lower: coding sequences comprise only a few per cent of the genome and an average of about 5% of each gene; internal exons are smaller than in worms; and genes appear to have more alternative splicing. The challenge is underscored by the work on human chromosomes 21 and 22. Even with the availability of ®nished sequence and intensive experimental work, the gene content remains uncertain, with upper and lower estimates differing by as much as 30%. The initial report of the ®nished sequence of chromosome 22 (ref. 94) identi®ed 247 previously known genes, 298 predicted genes con®rmed by sequence homology or ESTs and 325 ab initio predictions without additional support. Many of the con®rmed predictions represented partial genes. In the past year, 440 additional exons (10%) have been added to existing gene annotations by the chromosome 22 annotation group, although the number of con®rmed genes has increased by only 17 and some previously identi®ed gene predictions have been merged286. Before discussing the gene predictions for the human genome, it is useful to consider background issues, including previous estimates of the number of human genes, lessons learned from worms and ¯ies and the representativeness of currently `known' human genes. Previous estimates of human gene number. Although direct enumeration of human genes is only now becoming possible with the advent of the draft genome sequence, there have been many attempts in the past quarter of a century to estimate the number of genes indirectly. Early estimates based on reassociation kinetics estimated the mRNA complexity of typical vertebrate tissues to be 10,000±20,000, and were extrapolated to suggest around 40,000 for the entire genome287. In the mid-1980s, Gilbert suggested that there might be about 100,000 genes, based on the approximate ratio of the size of a typical gene (,3 ´ 104 bp) to the size of the genome (3 ´ 109 bp). Although this was intended only as a back-of-the-envelope estimate, the pleasing roundness of the ®gure seems to have led to it being widely quoted and adopted in many textbooks. (W. Gilbert, personal communication; ref. 288). An estimate of 70,000±80,000 genes was made by extrapolating from the number of CpG islands and the frequency of their association with known genes129. As human sequence information has accumulated, it has been possible to derive estimates on the basis of sampling techniques289. Such studies have sought to extrapolate from various types of data, including ESTs, mRNAs from known genes, cross-species genome comparisons and analysis of ®nished chromosomes. Estimates based on ESTs290 have varied widely, from 35,000 (ref. 130) to 120,000 genes291. Some of the discrepancy lies in differing estimates of the amount of contaminating genomic sequence in the EST collection and the extent to which multiple distinct ESTs correspond to a single gene. The most rigorous analyses130 exclude as spurious any ESTs that appear only once in the data set and carefully calibrate sensitivity and speci®city. Such calculations consistently produce low estimates, in the region of 35,000. Comparison of whole-genome shotgun sequence from the puffer®sh T. nigroviridis with the human genome292 can be used to estimate the density of exons (detected as conserved sequences
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
between ®sh and human). These analyses also suggest around 30,000 human genes. Extrapolations have also been made from the gene counts for chromosomes 21 and 22 (refs 93, 94), adjusted for differences in gene densities on these chromosomes, as inferred from EST mapping. These estimates are between 30,500 and 35,500, depending on the precise assumptions used286. Insights from invertebrates. The worm and ¯y genomes contain a large proportion of novel genes (around 50% of worm genes and 30% of ¯y genes), in the sense of showing no signi®cant similarity to organisms outside their phylum293±295. Such genes may have been present in the original eukaryotic ancestor, but were subsequently lost from the lineages of the other eukaryotes for which sequence is available; they may be rapidly diverging genes, so that it is dif®cult to recognize homologues solely on the basis of sequence; they may represent true innovations developed within the lineage; or they may represent acquisitions by horizontal transfer. Whatever their origin, these genes tend to have different biological properties from highly conserved genes. In particular, they tend to have low expression levels as assayed both by direct studies and by a paucity of corresponding ESTs, and are less likely to produce a visible phenotype in loss-of-function genetic experiments294,296. Gene prediction. Current gene prediction methods employ combinations of three basic approaches: direct evidence of transcription provided by ESTs or mRNAs297±299; indirect evidence based on sequence similarity to previously identi®ed genes and proteins300,301; and ab initio recognition of groups of exons on the basis of hidden Markov models (HMMs) that combine statistical information about splice sites, coding bias and exon and intron lengths (for example, Genscan275, Genie302,303 and FGENES304). The ®rst approach relies on direct experimental data, but is subject to artefacts arising from contaminating ESTs derived from unspliced mRNAs, genomic DNA contamination and nongenic transcription (for example, from the promoter of a transposable element). The ®rst two problems can be mitigated by comparing transcripts with the genomic sequence and using only those that show clear evidence of splicing. This solution, however, tends to discard evidence from genes with long terminal exons or single exons. The second approach tends correctly to identify gene-derived sequences, although some of these may be pseudogenes. However, it obviously cannot identify truly novel genes that have no sequence similarity to known genes. The third approach would suf®ce alone if one could accurately de®ne the features used by cells for gene recognition, but our current understanding is insuf®cient to do so. The sensitivity and speci®city of ab initio predictions are greatly affected by the signal-to-noise ratio. Such methods are more accurate in the ¯y and worm than in human. In ¯y, ab initio methods can correctly predict around 90% of individual exons and can correctly predict all coding exons of a gene in about 40% of cases303. For human, the comparable ®gures are only about 70% and 20%, respectively94,305. These estimates may be optimistic, owing to the design of the tests used. In any collection of gene predictions, we can expect to see various errors. Some gene predictions may represent partial genes, because of inability to detect some portions of a gene (incomplete sensitivity) or to connect all the components of a gene (fragmentation); some may be gene fusions; and others may be spurious predictions (incomplete speci®city) resulting from chance matches or pseudogenes. Creating an initial gene index. We set out to create an initial integrated gene index (IGI) and an associated integrated protein index (IPI) for the human genome. We describe the results obtained from a version of the draft genome sequence based on the sequence data available in July 2000, to allow time for detailed analysis of the gene and protein content. The additional sequence data that has since become available will affect the results quantitatively, but are unlikely to change the conclusions qualitatively.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

We began with predictions produced by the Ensembl system306. Ensembl starts with ab initio predictions produced by Genscan275 and then attempts to con®rm them by virtue of similarity to proteins, mRNAs, ESTs and protein motifs (contained in the Pfam database307) from any organism. In particular, it con®rms introns if they are bridged by matches and exons if they are ¯anked by con®rmed introns. It then attempts to extend protein matches using the GeneWise computer program308. Because it requires con®rmatory evidence to support each gene component, it frequently produces partial gene predictions. In addition, when there is evidence of alternative splicing, it reports multiple overlapping transcripts. In total, Ensembl produced 35,500 gene predictions with 44,860 transcripts. To reduce fragmentation, we next merged Ensembl-based gene predictions with overlapping gene predictions from another program, Genie302. Genie starts with mRNA or EST matches and employs an HMM to extend these matches by using ab initio statistical approaches. To avoid fragmentation, it attempts to link information from 59 and 39 ESTs from the same cDNA clone and thereby to produce a complete coding sequence from an initial ATG to a stop codon. As a result, it may generate complete genes more accurately than Ensembl in cases where there is extensive EST support. (Genie also generates potential alternative transcripts, but we used only the longest transcript in each group.) We merged 15,437 Ensembl predictions into 9,526 clusters, and the longest transcript in each cluster (from either Genie or Ensembl) was taken as the representative. Next, we merged these results with known genes contained in the RefSeq (version of 29 September 2000), SWISSPROT (release 39.6 of 30 August 2000) and TrEMBL databases (TrEMBL release 14.17 of 1 October 2000, TrEMBL_new of 1 October 2000). Incorporating these sequences gave rise to overlapping sequences because of alternative splice forms and partial sequences. To construct a nonredundant set, we selected the longest sequence from each overlapping set by using direct protein comparison and by mapping the gene predictions back onto the genome to construct the overlapping sets. This may occasionally remove some close paralogues in the event that the correct genomic location has not yet been sequenced, but this number is expected to be small. Finally, we searched the set to eliminate any genes derived from contaminating bacterial sequences, recognized by virtue of near identity to known bacterial plasmids, transposons and chromosomal genes. Although most instances of such contamination had been removed in the assembly process, a few cases had slipped through and were removed at this stage. The process resulted in version 1 of the IGI (IGI.1). The composition of the corresponding IPI.1 protein set, obtained by translating IGI.1, is given in Table 22. There are 31,778 protein predictions, with 14,882 from known genes, 4,057 predictions from Ensembl merged with Genie and 12,839 predictions from Ensembl alone. The average lengths are 469 amino acids for the known proteins, 443 amino acids for protein predictions from the Ensembl±Genie merge, and 187 amino acids for those from Ensembl alone. (The smaller average size for the predictions from Ensembl alone re¯ects its tendency to predict partial genes where there is supporting evidence for only part of the gene; the remainder of the gene will often not be predicted at all, rather than included as part of another prediction. Accordingly, the smaller size cannot be used to estimate the rate of fragmentation in such predictions.) The set corresponds to fewer than 31,000 actual genes, because some genes are fragmented into more than one partial prediction and some predictions may be spurious or correspond to pseudogenes. As discussed below, our best estimate is that IGI.1 includes about 24,500 true genes. Evaluation of IGI/IPI. We used several approaches to evaluate the sensitivity, speci®city and fragmentation of the IGI/IPI set. Comparison with `new' known genes. One approach was to examine
899

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
Table 22 Properties of the IGI/IPI human protein set
Source RefSeq/SwissProt/TrEMBL Ensembl±Genie Ensembl Total Number 14,882 4,057 12,839 31,778 Average length (amino acids) 469 443 187 352 Matches to nonhuman proteins 12,708 (85%) 2,989 (74%) 81,126 (63%) 23,813 (75%) Matches to RIKEN mouse cDNA set 11,599 (78%) 3,016 (74%) 7,372 (57%) 219,873 (69%) Matches to RIKEN mouse cDNA set but not to nonhuman proteins 776 (36%) 498 (47%) 1,449 (31%) 2,723 (34%)

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... The matches to nonhuman proteins were obtained by using Smith-Waterman sequence alignment with an E-value threshold of 10-3 and the matches to the RIKEN mouse cDNAs by using TBLASTN with an E-value threshold of 10-6. The last column shows that a signi®cant number of the IGI members that do not have nonhuman protein matches do match sequences in the RIKEN mouse cDNA set, suggesting that both the IGI and the RIKEN sets contain a signi®cant number of novel proteins.

newly discovered genes arising from independent work that were not used in our gene prediction effort. We identi®ed 31 such genes: 22 recent entries to RefSeq and 9 from the Sanger Centre's gene identi®cation program on chromosome X. Of these, 28 were contained in the draft genome sequence and 19 were represented in the IGI/IPI. This suggests that the gene prediction process has a sensitivity of about 68% (19/28) for the detection of novel genes in the draft genome sequence and that the current IGI contains about 61% (19/31) of novel genes in the human genome. On average, 79% of each gene was detected. The extent of fragmentation could also be estimated: 14 of the genes corresponded to a single prediction in the IGI/IPI, three genes corresponded to two predictions, one gene to three predictions and one gene to four predictions. This corresponds to a fragmentation rate of about 1.4 gene predictions per true gene. Comparison with RIKEN mouse cDNAs. In a less direct but largerscale approach, we compared the IGI gene set to a set of mouse cDNAs sequenced by the Genome Exploration Group of the RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center309. This set of 15,294 cDNAs, subjected to full-insert sequencing, was enriched for novel genes by selecting cDNAs with novel 39 ends from a collection of nearly one million ESTs from diverse tissues and developmental timepoints. We determined the proportion of the RIKEN cDNAs that showed sequence similarity to the draft genome sequence and the proportion that showed sequence similarity to the IGI/IPI. Around 81% of the genes in the RIKEN mouse set showed sequence similarity to the human genome sequence, whereas 69% showed sequence similarity to the IGI/IPI. This suggests a sensitivity of 85% (69/81). This is higher than the sensitivity estimate above, perhaps because some of the matches may be due to paralogues rather than orthologues. It is consistent with the IGI/IPI representing a substantial fraction of the human proteome. Conversely, 69% (22,013/31,898) of the IGI matches the RIKEN cDNA set. Table 22 shows the breakdown of these matches among the different components of the IGI. This is lower than the proportion of matches among known proteins, although this is expected because known proteins tend to be more highly conserved (see above) and because the predictions are on average shorter than known proteins. Table 22 also shows the numbers of matches to the RIKEN cDNAs among IGI members that do not match known proteins. The results indicate that both the IGI and the RIKEN set contain a signi®cant number of genes that are novel in the sense of not having known protein homologues. Comparison with genes on chromosome 22. We also compared the IGI/IPI with the gene annotations on chromosome 22, to assess the proportion of gene predictions corresponding to pseudogenes and to estimate the rate of overprediction. We compared 477 IGI gene predictions to 539 con®rmed genes and 133 pseudogenes on chromosome 22 (with the immunoglobulin lambda locus excluded owing to its highly atypical gene structure). Of these, 43 hit 36 annotated pseudogenes. This suggests that 9% of the IGI predictions may correspond to pseudogenes and also suggests a fragmentation rate of 1.2 gene predictions per gene. Of the remaining hits, 63 did not overlap with any current annotations. This would suggest a rate of spurious predictions of about 13% (63/477), although the true rate is likely to be much lower because many of these may correspond to
900

unannotated portions of existing gene predictions or to currently unannotated genes (of which there are estimated to be about 100 on this chromosome94). Chromosomal distribution. Finally, we examined the chromosomal distribution of the IGI gene set. The average density of gene predictions is 11.1 per Mb across the genome, with the extremes being chromosome 19 at 26.8 per Mb and chromosome Y at 6.4 per Mb. It is likely that a signi®cant number of the predictions on chromosome Y are pseudogenes (this chromosome is known to be rich in pseudogenes) and thus that the density for chromosome Y is an overestimate. The density of both genes and Alus on chromosome 19 is much higher than expected, even accounting for the high GC content of the chromosome; this supports the idea that Alu density is more closely correlated with gene density than with GC content itself. Summary. We are clearly still some way from having a complete set of human genes. The current IGI contains signi®cant numbers of partial genes, fragmented and fused genes, pseudogenes and spurious predictions, and it also lacks signi®cant numbers of true genes. This re¯ects the current state of gene prediction methods in vertebrates even in ®nished sequence, as well as the additional challenges related to the current state of the draft genome sequence. Nonetheless, the gene predictions provide a valuable starting point for a wide range of biological studies and will be rapidly re®ned in the coming year. The analysis above allows us to estimate the number of distinct genes in the IGI, as well as the number of genes in the human genome. The IGI set contains about 15,000 known genes and about 17,000 gene predictions. Assuming that the gene predictions are subject to a rate of overprediction (spurious predictions and pseudogenes) of 20% and a rate of fragmentation of 1.4, the IGI would be estimated to contain about 24,500 actual human genes. Assuming that the gene predictions contain about 60% of previously unknown human genes, the total number of genes in the human genome would be estimated to be about 31,000. This is consistent with most recent estimates based on sampling, which suggest a gene number of 30,000±35,000. If there are 30,000±35,000 genes, with an average coding length of about 1,400 bp and average genomic extent of about 30 kb, then about 1.5% of the human genome would consist of coding sequence and one-third of the genome would be transcribed in genes. The IGI/IPI was constructed primarily on the basis of gene predictions from Ensembl. However, we also generated an expanded set (IGI+) by including additional predictions from two other gene prediction programs, Genie and GenomeScan (C. Burge, personal communication). These predictions were not included in the core IGI set, because of the concern that each additional set will provide diminishing returns in identifying true genes while contributing its own false positives (increased sensitivity at the expense of speci®city). Genie produced an additional 2,837 gene predictions not overlapping the IGI, and GenomeScan produced 6,534 such gene predictions. If all of these gene predictions were included in the IGI, the number of the 31 new `known' genes (see above) contained in the IGI would rise from 19 to 24. This would amount to an increase of about 26% in sensitivity, at the expense of increasing the number of predicted genes (excluding knowns) by 55%. Allowing a higher
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
overprediction rate of 30% for gene predictions in this expanded set, the analysis above suggests that IGI+ set contains about 28,000 true genes and yields an estimate of about 32,000 human genes. We are investigating ways to ®lter the expanded set, to produce an IGI with the advantage of the increased sensitivity resulting from combining multiple gene prediction programs without the corresponding loss of speci®city. Meanwhile, the IGI+ set can be used by researchers searching for genes that cannot be found in the IGI. Some classes of genes may have been missed by all of the gene®nding methods. Genes could be missed if they are expressed at low levels or in rare tissues (being absent or very under-represented in EST and mRNA databases) and have sequences that evolve rapidly (being hard to detect by protein homology and genome comparison). Both the worm and ¯y gene sets contain a substantial number of such genes293,294. Single-exon genes encoding small proteins may also have been missed, because EST evidence that supports them cannot be distinguished from genomic contamination in the EST dataset and because homology may be hard to detect for small proteins310. The human thus appears to have only about twice as many genes as worm or ¯y. However, human genes differ in important respects from those in worm and ¯y. They are spread out over much larger regions of genomic DNA, and they are used to construct more alternative transcripts. This may result in perhaps ®ve times as many primary protein products in the human as in the worm or ¯y. The predicted gene and protein sets described here are clearly far from ®nal. Nonetheless, they provide a valuable starting point for experimental and computational research. The predictions will improve progressively as the sequence is ®nished, as further con®rmatory evidence becomes available (particularly from other vertebrate genome sequences, such as those of mouse and T. nigroviridis), and as computational methods improve. We intend to create and release updated versions of the IGI and IPI regularly, until they converge to a ®nal accurate list of every human gene. The gene predictions will be linked to RefSeq, HUGO and SWISSPROT identi®ers where available, and tracking identi®ers between versions will be included, so that individual genes under study can be traced forwards as the human sequence is completed.
Comparative proteome analysis

Knowledge of the human proteome will provide unprecedented opportunities for studies of human gene function. Often clues will be provided by sequence similarity with proteins of known function in model organisms. Such initial observations must then be followed up by detailed studies to establish the actual function of these molecules in humans. For example, 35 proteins are known to be involved in the vacuolar protein-sorting machinery in yeast. Human genes encoding homologues can be found in the draft human sequence for 34 of these yeast proteins, but precise relationships are not always clear. In nine cases there appears to be a single clear human orthologue (a gene that arose as a consequence of speciation); in 12 cases there are matches to a family of human paralogues (genes that arose owing to intra-genome duplication); and in 13 cases there are matches to speci®c protein domains311±314. Hundreds of similar stories emerge from the draft sequence, but each merits a detailed interpretation in context. To treat these subjects properly, there will be many following studies, the ®rst of which appear in accompanying papers315±323. Here, we aim to take a more global perspective on the content of the human proteome by comparing it with the proteomes of yeast, worm, ¯y and mustard weed. Such comparisons shed useful light on the commonalities and differences among these eukaryotes294,324,325. The analysis is necessarily preliminary, because of the imperfect nature of the human sequence, uncertainties in the gene and protein sets for all of the multicellular organisms considered and our incomplete knowledge of protein structures. Nonetheless, some general patterns emerge. These include insights into fundamental
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

mechanisms that create functional diversity, including invention of protein domains, expansion of protein and domain families, evolution of new protein architectures and horizontal transfer of genes. Other mechanisms, such as alternative splicing, post-translational modi®cation and complex regulatory networks, are also crucial in generating diversity but are much harder to discern from the primary sequence. We will not attempt to consider the effects of alternative splicing on proteins; we will consider only a single splice form from each gene in the various organisms, even when multiple splice forms are known. Functional and evolutionary classi®cation. We began by classifying the human proteome on the basis of functional categories and evolutionary conservation. We used the InterPro annotation protocol to identify conserved biochemical and cellular processes. InterPro is a tool for combining sequence-pattern information from four databases. The ®rst two databases (PRINTS326 and Prosite327) primarily contain information about motifs corresponding to speci®c family subtypes, such as type II receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK-II) in particular or tyrosine kinases in general. The second two databases (Pfam307 and Prosite Pro®le327) contain information (in the form of pro®les or HMMs) about families of structural domainsÐfor example, protein kinase domains. InterPro integrates the motif and domain assignments into a hierarchical classi®cation system; so a protein might be classi®ed at the most detailed level as being an RTK-II, at a more general level as being a kinase speci®c for tyrosine, and at a still more general level as being a protein kinase. The complete hierarchy of InterPro entries is described at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/. We collapsed the InterPro entries into 12 broad categories, each re¯ecting a set of cellular functions. The InterPro families are partly the product of human judgement and re¯ect the current state of biological and evolutionary knowledge. The system is a valuable way to gain insight into large collections of proteins, but not all proteins can be classi®ed at present. The proportions of the yeast, worm, ¯y and mustard weed protein sets that are assigned to at least one InterPro family is, for each organism, about 50% (Table 23; refs 307, 326, 327). About 40% of the predicted human proteins in the IPI could be assigned to InterPro entries and functional categories. On the basis of these assignments, we could compare organisms according to the number of proteins in each category (Fig. 37). Compared with the two invertebrates, humans appear to have many proteins involved in cytoskeleton, defence and immunity, and transcription and translation. These expansions are clearly related to aspects of vertebrate physiology. Humans also have many more proteins that are classi®ed as falling into more than one functional category (426 in human versus 80 in worm and 57 in ¯y, data not shown). Interestingly, 32% of these are transmembrane receptors. We obtained further insight into the evolutionary conservation of proteins by comparing each sequence to the complete nonredundant database of protein sequences maintained at NCBI, using the BLASTP computer program328 and then breaking down the matches according to organismal taxonomy (Fig. 38). Overall, 74% of the proteins had signi®cant matches to known proteins. Such classi®cations are based on the presence of clearly detectable homologues in existing databases. Many of these genes have surely evolved from genes that were present in common ancestors but have since diverged substantially. Indeed, one can detect more distant relationships by using sensitive computer programs that can recognize weakly conserved features. Using PSI-BLAST, we can recognize probable nonvertebrate homologues for about 45% of the `vertebrate-speci®c' set. Nonetheless, the classi®cation is useful for gaining insights into the commonalities and differences among the proteomes of different organisms. Probable horizontal transfer. An interesting category is a set of 223 proteins that have signi®cant similarity to proteins from bacteria, but no comparable similarity to proteins from yeast, worm, ¯y and
901

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
Table 23 Properties of genome and proteome in essentially completed eukaryotic proteomes
Human Number of identi®ed genes % with InterPro matches Number of annotated domain families Number of InterPro entries per gene Number of distinct domain architectures Percentage of 1-1-1-1 % Signal sequences % Transmembrane proteins % Repeat-containing % Coiled-coil ,32,000* 51 1,262 0.53 1,695 1.40 20 20 10 11 Fly 13,338 56 1,035 0.84 1,036 4.20 20 25 11 13 Worm 18,266 50 1,014 0.63 1,018 3.10 24 28 9 10 Yeast 6,144 50 851 0.6 310 9.20 11 15 5 9 Mustard weed 25,706 52 1,010 0.62 ± ± ± ± ± ±

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... The numbers of distinct architectures were calculated using SMART339 and the percentages of repeat-containing proteins were estimated using Prospero452 and a P-value threshold of 10-5. The protein sets used in the analysis were taken from http://www.ebi.ac.uk/proteome/ for yeast, worm and ¯y. The proteins from mustard weed were taken from the TAIR website (http:// www.arabidopsis.org/) on 5 September 2000. The protein set was searched against the InterPro database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) using the InterProscan software. Comparison of protein sequences with the InterPro database allows prediction of protein families, domain and repeat families and sequence motifs. The searches used Pfam release 5.2307, Prints release 26.1326, Prosite release 16327 and Prosite preliminary pro®les. InterPro analysis results are available as Supplementary Information. The fraction of 1-1-1-1 is the percentage of the genome that falls into orthologous groups composed of only one member each in human, ¯y, worm and yeast. * The gene number for the human is still uncertain (see text). Table is based on 31,778 known genes and gene predictions.

mustard weed, or indeed from any other (nonvertebrate) eukaryote. These sequences should not represent bacterial contamination in the draft human sequence, because we ®ltered the sequence to eliminate sequences that were essentially identical to known bacterial plasmid, transposon or chromosomal DNA (such as the host strains for the large-insert clones). To investigate whether these were genuine human sequences, we designed PCR primers for 35 of these genes and con®rmed that most could be readily detected directly in human genomic DNA (Table 24). Orthologues of many of these genes have also been detected in other vertebrates (Table 24). A more detailed computational analysis indicated that at least 113 of these genes are widespread among bacteria, but, among eukaryotes, appear to be present only in vertebrates. It is possible that the genes encoding these proteins were present in both early prokaryotes and eukaryotes, but were lost in each of the lineages of yeast, worm, ¯y, mustard weed and, possibly, from other nonvertebrate eukaryote lineages. A more parsimonious explanation is that these genes entered the vertebrate (or prevertebrate) lineage by horizontal transfer from bacteria. Many of these genes contain introns, which presumably were acquired after the putative horizontal transfer event. Similar observations indicating probable lineage-speci®c horizontal gene transfers, as well as intron insertion in the acquired genes, have been made in the worm genome329.
5,000
Yeast

We cannot formally exclude the possibility that gene transfer occurred in the opposite directionÐthat is, that the genes were invented in the vertebrate lineage and then transferred to bacteria. However, we consider this less likely. Under this scenario, the broad distribution of these genes among bacteria would require extensive horizontal dissemination after their initial acquisition. In addition, the functional repertoire of these genes, which largely encode intracellular enzymes (Table 24), is uncharacteristic of vertebratespeci®c evolutionary innovations (which appear to be primarily extracellular proteins; see below). We did not identify a strongly preferred bacterial source for the putative horizontally transferred genes, indicating the likelihood of multiple independent gene transfers from different bacteria (Table 24). Notably, several of the probable recent acquisitions have established (or likely) roles in metabolism of xenobiotics or stress response. These include several hydrolases of different speci®cities, including epoxide hydrolase, and several dehydrogenases (Table 24). Of particular interest is the presence of two paralogues of monoamine oxidase (MAO), an enzyme of the mitochondrial outer membrane that is central in the metabolism of neuromediators and is a target of important psychiatric drugs330±333. This example shows that at least some of the genes thought to be horizontally transferred into the vertebrate lineage appear to be involved in important physiological functions and so probably have been ®xed and maintained during evolution because

4,500 4,000 Number of proteins 3,500 3,000 2,500 2,000 1,500 1,000 500 0

Mustard weed Worm Fly Human

Prokaryotes only <1% Vertebrate only 22%

Eukaryote and prokaryote 21%

ss es io eta bo n/ an m lis sc m rip odi fic tio In at n/ tra io n ce tran C Pr llu el sl ot at l-c la ei io rs el n n l ig fo ld com na in llin m g g un an ic d de ati o gr ad n M ul at tif io un Tr n an ct C io sp yt na os or lp k t r De ele ta ote fe nc l/st ins ru e M ct a is u ce nd im ral lla ne m un ou ity s fu nc tio n

Vertebrates and other animals 24% No animal homology 1%

Animals and other eukaryotes 32%

rp el lu la C

ic

at

M

ro ce

Figure 37 Functional categories in eukaryotic proteomes. The classi®cation categories were derived from functional classi®cation systems, including the top-level biological function category of the Gene Ontology project (GO; see http://www.geneontology.org).
902

Figure 38 Distribution of the homologues of the predicted human proteins. For each protein, a homologue to a phylogenetic lineage was considered present if a search of the NCBI nonredundant protein sequence database, using the gapped BLASTP program, gave a random expectation (E ) value of # 0.001. Additional searches for probable homologues with lower sequence conservation were performed using the PSI-BLAST program, run for three iterations using the same cut-off for inclusion of sequences into the pro®le328.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

re DN A

pl

Tr

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
of the increased selective advantage(s) they provide. Genes shared with ¯y, worm and yeast. IPI.1 contains apparent homologues of 61% of the ¯y proteome, 43% of the worm proteome and 46% of the yeast proteome. We next considered the groups of proteins containing likely orthologues and paralogues (genes that arose from intragenome duplication) in human, ¯y, worm and yeast. Brie¯y, we performed all-against-all sequence comparison334 for the combined protein sets of human, yeast, ¯y and worm. Pairs of sequences that were one another's best matches in their respective genomes were considered to be potential orthologues. These were then used to identify orthologous groups across three organisms335. Recent species-speci®c paralogues were de®ned by using the allagainst-all sequence comparison to cluster the protein set for each organism. For each sequence found in an orthologous group, the recent paralogues were de®ned to be the largest species-speci®c cluster including it. The set of paralogues may be in¯ated by unrecognized splice variants and by fragmentation.
Table 24 Probable vertebrate-speci®c acquisitions of bacterial genes
Human protein (accession) Predicted function Known orthologues in other vertebrates Pig, rat, chicken Rodents, ungulates Bacterial homologues Range Thermotoga, Thermoplasma, Methylobacter Most bacteria Best hit Thermotoga maritima Vibrio parahaemolyticus Human origin con®rmed by PCR Yes Yes (CAB81772, AAC41747.1) NT* (AAB59448.1, AAA36608.1) Yes Yes NT* Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

We identi®ed 1,308 groups of proteins, each containing at least one predicted orthologue in each species and many containing additional paralogues. The 1,308 groups contained 3,129 human proteins, 1,445 ¯y proteins, 1,503 worm proteins and 1,441 yeast proteins. These 1,308 groups represent a conserved core of proteins that are mostly responsible for the basic `housekeeping' functions of the cell, including metabolism, DNA replication and repair, and translation. In 564 of the 1,308 groups, one orthologue (and no additional paralogues) could be unambiguously assigned for each of human, ¯y, worm and yeast. These groups will be referred to as 1-1-1-1 groups. More than half (305) of these groups could be assigned to the functional categories shown in Fig. 37. Within these functional categories, the numbers of groups containing single orthologues in each of the four proteomes was: 19 for cellular processes, 66 for metabolism, 31 for DNA replication and modi®cation, 106 for transcription/translation, 13 for intracellular signalling, 24 for protein folding and degradation, 38 for transport, 5 for

AAG01853.1 CAB81772.1 AAB59448.1 AAA36608.1 AAC41747.1 BAA1143.21 CAB59628.1 BAA91273.1 CAA75608.1 AAA59548.1 AAB27229.1 AAF12736.1 AAA51565.1 IGI_M1_ctg19153_147 BAA92632.1 BAA34458.1 AAF24044.1 BAA34458.1 BAA91839.1 BAA92073.1 BAA92133.1 BAA91174.1 AAA60043.1 BAA86552.1 IGI_M1_ctg12741_7 IGI_M1_ctg13238_61 IGI_M1_ctg13305_116 IGI_M1_ctg14420_10 IGI_M1_ctg16010_18 IGI_M1_ctg16227_58 IGI_M1_ctg25107_24

Formiminotransferase cyclodeaminase Na/glucose cotransporter

Mouse, Danio, fugu ®sh Protein-methionine-S-oxide reductase Cow Hypertension-associated protein SA/ Mouse, rat, cow acetate-CoA ligase Glucose-6-phosphate transporter/ Mouse, rat glycogen storage disease type 1b protein Monoamine oxidase Cow, rat, salmon Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, mitochondrial protein Aldose-1-epimerase Mouse, rat, pig Pig (also found in plants) None

Epoxide hydrolase (a/b-hydrolase)

Most bacteria Most bacteria Most bacteria Most bacteria Most bacteria Most bacteria Streptomyces, Bacillus

Pseudomonas aeruginosa Synechocystis sp. Bacillus halodurans Chlamydophila pneumoniae Mycobacterium tuberculosis P. aeruginosa Streptomyces coelicolor

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... * NT, not tested. Representative genes con®rmed by PCR to be present in the human genome. The similarity to a bacterial homologue was considered to be `signi®cantly' greater than that to eukaryotic homologues if the difference in alignment scores returned by BLASTP was greater than 30 bits (,9 orders of magnitude in terms of E-value). A complete, classi®ed and annotated list of probable vertebrate-speci®c horizontal gene transfers detected in this analysis is available as Supplementary Information. cDNA sequences for each protein were searched, using the SSAHA algorithm, against the draft genome sequence. Primers were designed and PCR was performed using three human genomic samples and a random BAC clone. The predicted genes were considered to be present in the human genome if a band of the expected size was found in all three human samples but not in the control clone.

Predicted carboxylase (C-terminal Streptomyces, Rhizobium, S. coelicolor domain, N-terminal domain unique) Bacillus Uncharacterized protein None Gamma-proteobacteria Escherichia coli Uncharacterized protein None Most bacteria T. maritima b-Lactamase superfamily hydrolase None Most bacteria Synechocystis sp. Oxidoreductase (Rossmann fold) None (several human Actinomycetes, Leptospira; S. coelicolor fused to a six-transmembrane protein paralogues of both more distant homologues in parts) other bacteria Oxidoreductase (Rossmann fold) None Synechocystis, Pseudomonas Synechocystis sp. a/b-hydrolase None Rickettsia; more distant Rickettsia prowazekii homologues in other bacteria ADP-ribosylglycohydrolase None Streptomyces, Aquifex, S. coelicolor Archaeoglobus (archaeon), E. coli Thymidine phosporylase/endothelial None Most bacteria Bacillus stearothermophilus cell growth factor Ribosomal protein S6-glutamic acid None Most bacteria and archaea Haemophilus in¯uenzae ligase Ribosomal protein S6-glutamic acid None Most bacteria and archaea H. in¯uenzae ligase (paralogue of the above) Hydratase None Synechocystis, Synechocystis sp. Sphingomonas Homologue of histone macro-2A C- None (several human Thermotoga, Alcaligenes, E. T. maritima terminal domain, predicted paralogues, RNA coli, more distant homologues phosphatase viruses) in other bacteria Sugar transporter None Most bacteria Synechocystis sp. Predicted metal-binding protein None Most bacteria Borrelia burgdorferi Pseudouridine synthase None Most bacteria Zymomonas mobilis Surfactin synthetase domain None Gram-positive bacteria, Bacillus subtilis Actinomycetes, Cyanobacteria

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

903

articles
multifunctional proteins and 3 for cytoskeletal/structural. No such groups were found for defence and immunity or cell±cell communication. The 1-1-1-1 groups probably represent key functions that have not undergone duplication and elaboration in the various lineages. They include many anabolic enzymes responsible for such functions as respiratory chain and nucleotide biosynthesis. In contrast, there are few catabolic enzymes. As anabolic pathways branch less frequently than catabolic pathways, this indicates that alternative routes and displacements are more frequent in catabolic reactions. If proteins from the single-celled yeast are excluded from the analysis, there are 1,195 1-1-1 groups. The additional groups include many examples of more complex signalling proteins, such as receptor-type and src-like tyrosine kinases, likely to have arisen early in the metazoan lineage. The fact that this set comprises only a small proportion of the proteome of each of the animals indicates that, apart from a modest conserved core, there has been extensive elaboration and innovation within the protein complement. Most proteins do not show simple 1-1-1 orthologous relationships across the three animals. To illustrate this, we investigated the nuclear hormone receptor family. In the human proteome, this family consists of 60 different `classical' members, each with a zinc ®nger and a ligand-binding domain. In comparison, the ¯y proteome has 19 and the worm proteome has 220. As shown in Fig. 39, few simple orthologous relationships can be derived among these homologues. And, where potential subgroups of orthologues and paralogues could be identi®ed, it was apparent that the functions of the subgroup members could differ signi®cantly. For example, the ¯y receptor for the ¯y-speci®c hormone ecdysone and the human retinoic acid receptors cluster together on the basis of sequence similarity. Such examples underscore that the assignment of functional similarity on the basis of sequence similarities among these three organisms is not trivial in most cases. New vertebrate domains and proteins. We then explored how the proteome of vertebrates (as represented by the human) differs from those of the other species considered. The 1,262 InterPro families were scanned to identify those that contain only vertebrate proteins. Only 94 (7%) of the families were `vertebrate-speci®c'. These represent 70 protein families and 24 domain families. Only one of the 94 families represents enzymes, which is consistent with the ancient origins of most enzymes336. The single vertebrate-speci®c enzyme family identi®ed was the pancreatic or eosinophil-associated ribonucleases. These enzymes evolved rapidly, possibly to combat vertebrate pathogens337. The relatively small proportion of vertebrate-speci®c multicopy families suggests that few new protein domains have been invented in the vertebrate lineage, and that most protein domains trace at least as far back as a common animal ancestor. This conclusion must be tempered by the fact that the InterPro classi®cation system is incomplete; additional vertebrate-speci®c families undoubtedly exist that have not yet been recognized in the InterPro system. The 94 vertebrate-speci®c families appear to re¯ect important physiological differences between vertebrates and other eukaryotes. Defence and immunity proteins (23 families) and proteins that function in the nervous system (17 families) are particularly enriched in this set. These data indicate the recent emergence or rapid divergence of these proteins. Representative human proteins were previously known for nearly all of the vertebrate-speci®c families. This was not surprising, given the anthropocentrism of biological research. However, the analysis did identify the ®rst mammalian proteins belonging to two of these families. Both of these families were originally de®ned in ®sh. The ®rst is the family of polar ®sh antifreeze III proteins. We found a human sialic acid synthase containing a domain homologous to polar ®sh antifreeze III protein (BAA91818.1). This ®nding suggests that ®sh created the antifreeze function by adaptation of this domain. We also found a human protein (CAB60269.1) homologous to the ependymin found in teleost ®sh. Ependymins are major glycoproteins of ®sh brains that have been claimed to be involved in long-term memory formation338. The function of the mammalian ependymin homologue will need to be elucidated. New architectures from old domains. Whereas there appears to be only modest invention at the level of new vertebrate protein domains, there appears to be substantial innovation in the creation of new vertebrate proteins. This innovation is evident at the level of domain architecture, de®ned as the linear arrangement of domains within a polypeptide. New architectures can be created by shuf¯ing, adding or deleting domains, resulting in new proteins from old parts. We quanti®ed the number of distinct protein architectures found in yeast, worm, ¯y and human by using the SMART annotation resource339 (Fig. 40). The human proteome set contained 1.8 times as many protein architectures as worm or ¯y and 5.8 times as many as yeast. This difference is most prominent in the recent evolution of novel extracellular and transmembrane architectures in the human lineage. Human extracellular proteins show the greatest innovation: the human has 2.3 times as many extracellular architectures as ¯y and 2.0 times as many as worm. The larger number of human architectures does not simply re¯ect differences in the number of domains known in these organisms; the result remains qualitatively the same even if the number of architectures in each organism is normalized by dividing by the total number of domains (not shown). (We also checked that the larger number of human
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

Human (>200) Worm Fly (7)

(4) Hepatocyte nuclear factors

(3)

(6) Vitamin D3 Ecdysone (3) (3) Thyroid hormone (3) Retinoic acids (7) Steroid hormone (3) (3) (3) Peroxisome proliferator activated

(4) (2)

(2) Ecdysone (3) Retinoic acids

(3)

(2) (2) (2) Apolipoprotein regulatory protein

Figure 39 Simpli®ed cladogram (relationship tree) of the `many-to-many' relationships of classical nuclear receptors. Triangles indicate expansion within one lineage; bars represent single members. Numbers in parentheses indicate the number of paralogues in each group.
904

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
2,000 1,800 1,600 Number of distinct domain architectures Intracellular 1,400 1,200 1,000 800 600 400 200 0 Human Fly Worm Yeast Transmembrane Extracellular

Figure 40 Number of distinct domain architectures in the four eukaryotic genomes, predicted using SMART339. The number of architectures is split into three cellular environments: intracellular, extracellular and membrane-associated. The increase in architectures for the human, relative to the other lineages, is seen when these numbers

are normalized with respect to the numbers of domains predicted in each phylum. To avoid artefactual results from the relatively low detection rate for some repeat types, tandem occurrences of tetratricopeptide, armadillo, EF-hand, leucine-rich, WD40 or ankyrin repeats or C2H2-type zinc ®ngers were treated as single occurrences.

architectures could not be an artefact resulting from erroneous gene predictions. Three-quarters of the architectures can be found in known genes, which already yields an increase of about 50% over worm and ¯y. We expect the ®nal number of human architectures to grow as the complete gene set is identi®ed.) A related measure of proteome complexity can be obtained by considering an individual domain and counting the number of different domain types with which it co-occurs. For example, the trypsin-like serine protease domain (number 12 in Fig. 41) co-occurs with 18 domain types in human (including proteins involved in the mammalian complement system, blood coagulation, and ®brinolytic and related systems). By contrast, the trypsin-like serine protease domain occurs with only eight other domains in ¯y, ®ve in worm and one in yeast. Similar results for 27 common domains are shown in Fig. 41. In general, there are more different co-occurring domains in the human proteome than in the other proteomes. One mechanism by which architectures evolve is through the fusion of additional domains, often at one or both ends of the proteins. Such `domain accretion'340 is seen in many human proteins when compared with proteins from other eukaryotes. The effect is illustrated by several chromatin-associated proteins (Fig. 42). In these examples, the domain architectures of human proteins differ from those found in yeast, worm and ¯y proteins only by the addition of domains at their termini. Among chromatin-associated proteins and transcription factors, a signi®cant proportion of domain architectures is shared between the vertebrate and ¯y, but not with worm (Fig. 43a). The trend was even more prominent in architectures of proteins involved in another key cellular process, programmed cell death (Fig. 43b). These examples might seem to bear upon the unresolved issue of the evolutionary branching order of worms, ¯ies and humans, suggesting that worms branched off ®rst. However, there were other cases in which worms and humans shared architectures not present in ¯y. A global analysis of shared architectures could not conclusively distinguish between the two models, given the possibility of lineage-speci®c loss of architectures. Comparison of protein architectures may help to resolve the evolutionary issue, but it will require more detailed analyses of many protein families. New physiology from old proteins. An important aspect of
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

70 Number of co-occurring domains 60 50 40 30 20 10 0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1112 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Mustard weed Yeast Worm Fly Human

Domain family

21 22 23 24

25 26 27

Figure 41 Number of different Pfam domain types that co-occur in the same protein, for each of the 10 most common domain families in each of the ®ve eukaryotic proteomes. Because some common domain families are shared, there are 27 families rather than 50. The data are ranked according to decreasing numbers of human co-occurring Pfam domains. The domain families are: (1) eukaryotic protein kinase [IPR000719]; (2) immunoglobulin domain [IPR003006]; (3) ankyrin repeat [IPR002110]; (4) RING ®nger [IPR001841]; (5) C2H2-type zinc ®nger [IPR000822]; (6) ATP/GTP-binding P-loop [IPR001687]; (7) reverse transcriptase (RNA-dependent DNA polymerase) [IPR000477]; (8) leucine-rich repeat [IPR001611]; (9) G-proteinb WD-40 repeats [IPR001680]; (10) RNA-binding region RNP-1 (RNA recognition motif) [IPR000504]; (11) C-type lectin domain [IPR001304]; (12) serine proteases, trypsin family [IPR001254]; (13) helicase C-terminal domain [IPR001650]; (14) collagen triple helix repeat [IPR000087]; (15) rhodopsin-like GPCR superfamily [IPR000276]; (16) esterase/lipase/thioesterase [IPR000379]; (17) Myb DNA-binding domain [IPR001005]; (18) F-box domain [IPR001810]; (19) ATP-binding transport protein, 2nd P-loop motif [IPR001051]; (20) homeobox domain [IPR001356]; (21) C4-type steroid receptor zinc ®nger [IPR001628]; (22) sugar transporter [IPR001066]; (23) PPR repeats [IPR002885]; (24) seven-helix G-protein-coupled receptor, worm (probably olfactory) family [IPR000168]; (25) cytochrome P450 enzyme [IPR001128]; (26) fungal transcriptional regulatory protein, N terminus [IPR001138]; (27) domain of unknown function DUF38 [IPR002900].
905

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
a
Br
A

Y Br Ba RSC1/2

Znf *

Ba

hmg *

* W

CG11375

b
Ep1

Y PHD PHD Ep2 Ep1

F, H PHD PHD PHD PHD PHD Znf Ep2 Br * Ep1 Ep2 Br BMB *

Znf

W, F, V Br Br Br Br Br Br

W PHD Ch Ch SWI2 PHD Sa hmg *

F, H Ch Ch Mi-2 SWI2 Sa

* YPR031w

PHD

Lin-49

*

peregrin

CHD-3/T14G8.1

Y, F, V Ep1 Ep2 E(Pc)-like F PHD PHD PHD PHD

c

H PHD PHD PHD sja C CC SET
C

Br *

Trx W, F, H

A A A *

Me *

Br

PHD

sja C CC

SET

C

Hrx

PHD

PHD

Common ancestor 2...5

hmg sja C CC ALR

SET

C

Figure 42 Examples of domain accretion in chromatin proteins. Domain accretion in various lineages before the animal divergence, in the apparent coelomate lineage and the vertebrate lineage are shown using schematic representations of domain architectures (not to scale). Asterisks, mobile domains that have participated in the accretion. Species in which a domain architecture has been identi®ed are indicated above the diagram (Y, yeast; W, worm; F, ¯y; V, vertebrate). Protein names are below the diagrams. The

domains are SET, a chromatin protein methyltransferase domain; SWI2, a superfamily II helicase/ATPase domain; Sa, sant domain; Br, bromo domain; Ch, chromodomain; C, a cysteine triad motif associated with the Msl-2 and SET domains; A, AT hook motif; EP1/ EP2, enhancer of polycomb domains 1 and 2; Znf, zinc ®nger; sja, SET-JOR-associated domain (L. Aravind, unpublished); Me, DNA methylase/Hrx-associated DNA binding zinc ®nger; Ba, bromo-associated homology motif. a±c, Different examples of accretion.

vertebrate innovation lies in the expansion of protein families. Table 25 shows the most prevalent protein domains and protein families in humans, together with their relative ranks in the other species. About 60% of families are more numerous in the human than in any of the other four organisms. This shows that gene duplication has been a major evolutionary force during vertebrate evolution. A
a
Conserved domain architectures in chromatin proteins

31 Human and fly Human and worm Worm and fly All three 8 3

60

b

Conserved domain architectures in apoptotic proteins

10 Human and fly Human and worm Worm and fly All three

16

2 3

Figure 43 Conservation of architectures between animal species. The pie charts illustrate the shared domain architectures of apparent orthologues that are conserved in at least two of the three sequenced animal genomes. If an architecture was detected in fungi or plants, as well as two of the animal lineages, it was omitted as ancient and its absence in the third animal lineage attributed to gene loss. a, Chromatin-associated proteins. b, Components of the programmed cell death system.
906

comparison of relative expansions in human versus ¯y is shown in Fig. 44. Many of the families that are expanded in human relative to ¯y and worm are involved in distinctive aspects of vertebrate physiology. An example is the family of immunoglobulin (IG) domains, ®rst identi®ed in antibodies thirty years ago. Classic (as opposed to divergent) IG domains are completely absent from the yeast and mustard weed proteomes and, although prokaryotic homologues exist, they have probably been transferred horizontally from metazoans341. Most IG superfamily proteins in invertebrates are cell-surface proteins. In vertebrates, the IG repertoire includes immune functions such as those of antibodies, MHC proteins, antibody receptors and many lymphocyte cell-surface proteins. The large expansion of IG domains in vertebrates shows the versatility of a single family in evoking rapid and effective response to infection. Two prominent families are involved in the control of development. The human genome contains 30 ®broblast growth factors (FGFs), as opposed to two FGFs each in the ¯y and worm. It contains 42 transforming growth factor-bs (TGFbs) compared with nine and six in the ¯y and worm, respectively. These growth factors are involved in organogenesis, such as that of the liver and the lung. A ¯y FGF protein, branchless, is involved in developing respiratory organs (tracheae) in embryos342. Thus, developmental triggers of morphogenesis in vertebrates have evolved from related but simpler systems in invertebrates343. Another example is the family of intermediate ®lament proteins, with 127 family members. This expansion is almost entirely due to 111 keratins, which are chordate-speci®c intermediate ®lament proteins that form ®laments in epithelia. The large number of human keratins suggests multiple cellular structural support roles for the many specialized epithelia of vertebrates. Finally, the olfactory receptor genes comprise a huge gene family of about 1,000 genes and pseudogenes344,345. The number of olfactory receptors testi®es to the importance of the sense of smell in vertebrates. A total of 906 olfactory receptor genes and pseudogenes could be identi®ed in the draft genome sequence, two-thirds of which were not previously annotated. About 80% are found in about two dozen clusters ranging from 6 to 138 genes and encompassing about 30 Mb (,1%) of the human genome. Despite the importance of smell among our vertebrate ancestors, hominids
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
appear to have considerably less interest in this sense. About 60% of the olfactory receptors in the draft genome sequence have disrupted ORFs and appear to be pseudogenes, consistent with recent reports344,346 suggesting massive functional gene loss in the last 10 Myr347,348. Interestingly, there appears to be a much higher proportion of intact genes among class I than class II olfactory receptors, suggesting functional importance. Vertebrates are not unique in employing gene family expansion. For many domain types, expansions appear to have occurred independently in each of the major eukaryotic lineages. A good example is the classical C2H2 family of zinc ®nger domains, which have expanded independently in the yeast, worm, ¯y and human lineages (Fig. 45). These independent expansions have resulted in numerous C2H2 zinc ®nger domain-containing proteins that are speci®c to each lineage. In ¯ies, the important components of the C2H2 zinc ®nger expansion are architectures in which it is combined with the POZ domain and the C4DM domain (a metalbinding domain found only in ¯y). In humans, the most prevalent expansions are combinations of the C2H2 zinc ®nger with POZ (independent of the one in insects) and the vertebrate-speci®c KRAB and SCAN domains. The homeodomain is similarly expanded in all animals and is present in both architectures that are conserved and lineage-speci®c architectures (Fig. 45). This indicates that the ancestral animal probably encoded a signi®cant number of homeodomain proteins, but subsequent evolution involved multiple, independent expansions and domain shuf¯ing after lineages diverged. Thus, the most prevalent transcription factor families are different in worm, ¯y and human (Fig. 45). This has major biological implications because transcription factors are critical in animal development and differentiation. The emergence of major variations in the developmental body plans that accompanied the early radiation of the animals349 could have been driven by lineage-speci®c proliferation of such transcription factors. Beyond these large expansions of protein families, protein components of particular functional systems such as the cell death signalling system show a general increase in diversity and numbers in the vertebrates relative to other animals. For example, there are greater numbers of and more novel architectures in cell death regulatory proteins such as BCL-2, TNFR and NFkB from vertebrates. Conclusion. Five lines of evidence point to an increase in the complexity of the proteome from the single-celled yeast to the multicellular invertebrates and to vertebrates such as the human. Speci®cally, the human contains greater numbers of genes, domain and protein families, paralogues, multidomain proteins with multiple functions, and domain architectures. According to these measures, the relatively greater complexity of the human proteome is a consequence not simply of its larger size, but also of large-scale protein innovation. An important question is the extent to which the greater phenotypic complexity of vertebrates can be explained simply by two- or threefold increases in proteome complexity. The real explanation may lie in combinatorial ampli®cation of these modest differences, by mechanisms that include alternative splicing, post-translational modi®cation and cellular regulatory networks. The potential numbers of different proteins and protein±protein interactions are vast, and their actual numbers cannot readily be discerned from the genome sequence. Elucidating such systemlevel properties presents one of the great challenges for modern biology.

Table 25 The most populous InterPro families in the human proteome and other species
Human InterPro ID IPR003006 PR000822 IPR000719 IPR000276 IPR001687 IPR000477 IPR000504 IPR001680 IPR002110 IPR001356 IPR001849 IPR002048 IPR000561 IPR001452 IPR001841 IPR001611 IPR001909 IPR001777 IPR001478 IPR001650 IPR001440 IPR002216 IPR001092 IPR000008 IPR001664 IPR001254 IPR002126 IPR000210 IPR000387 IPR000087 IPR000379 IPR000910 IPR000130 IPR001965 IPR000636 IPR001781 IPR002035 IPR001715 IPR000198 No. of genes 765 706 575 569 433 350 300 277 276 267 252 242 222 215 210 188 171 165 162 155 150 133 131 123 119 118 114 113 112 106 94 89 87 84 83 81 81 80 77 Rank (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (36) (37) (38) No. of genes 140 357 319 97 198 10 157 162 105 148 77 111 81 72 114 115 0 63 70 87 86 65 84 43 4 210 19 78 35 18 141 38 56 37 32 38 8 33 20 Fly Rank (9) (1) (2) (14) (4) (65) (6) (5) (13) (7) (22) (12) (20) (23) (11) (10) (na) (27) (24) (17) (18) (26) (19) (34) (71) (3) (56) (21) (40) (57) (8) (38) (29) (39) (43) (38) (67) (42) (55) Worm No. of genes 64 151 437 358 183 50 96 102 107 109 71 81 113 62 126 54 0 51 66 78 46 99 41 36 22 12 16 117 108 169 134 18 92 24 24 36 45 30 20 Rank (34) (10) (2) (3) (7) (41) (21) (19) (17) (15) (31) (25) (14) (35) (12) (38) (na) (40) (33) (27) (43) (20) (46) (49) (63) (73) (69) (13) (16) (9) (11) (67) (22) (61) (61) (49) (44) (55) (65) Yeast No. of genes 0 48 121 0 97 6 54 91 19 9 27 15 0 25 35 7 0 2 2 79 36 2 7 9 1 1 0 1 12 0 40 8 8 16 1 4 3 3 10 Rank (na) (7) (1) (na) (2) (36) (6) (3) (23) (33) (17) (27) (na) (18) (12) (35) (na) (40) (40) (4) (11) (40) (35) (33) (41) (41) (na) (41) (30) (na) (10) (34) (34) (26) (41) (38) (39) (39) (32) Mustard weed No. of genes 0 115 1049 16 331 80 255 210 120 118 27 167 17 3 379 392 0 4 15 148 125 31 106 82 2 15 0 54 21 5 194 18 12 71 14 8 17 18 9 Rank (na) (20) (1) (84) (5) (35) (8) (10) (18) (19) (73) (12) (83) (97) (4) (2) (na) (96) (85) (13) (17) (69) (24) (34) (98) (85) (na) (50) (79) (95) (11) (82) (88) (39) (86) (92) (83) (82) (91) Immunoglobulin domain C2H2 zinc ®nger Eukaryotic protein kinase Rhodopsin-like GPCR superfamily P-loop motif Reverse transcriptase (RNA-dependent DNA polymerase) rrm domain G-protein b WD-40 repeats Ankyrin repeat Homeobox domain PH domain EF-hand family EGF-like domain SH3 domain RING ®nger Leucine-rich repeat KRAB box Fibronectin type III domain PDZ domain Helicase C-terminal domain TPR repeat Ion transport protein Helix±loop±helix DNA-binding domain C2 domain SH2 domain Serine protease, trypsin family Cadherin domain BTB/POZ domain Tyrosine-speci®c protein phosphatase and dual speci®city protein phosphatase family Collagen triple helix repeat Esterase/lipase/thioesterase HMG1/2 (high mobility group) box Neutral zinc metallopeptidase PHD-®nger Cation channels (non-ligand gated) LIM domain VWA domain Calponin homology domain RhoGAP domain

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... Forty most populous Interpro families found in the human proteome compared with equivalent numbers from other species. na, not applicable (used when there are no proteins in an organism in that family).

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

907

articles
Segmental history of the human genome
In bacteria, genomic segments often convey important information about function: genes located close to one another often encode proteins in a common pathway and are regulated in a common operon. In mammals, genes found close to each other only rarely have common functions, but they are still interesting because they have a common history. In fact, the study of genomic segments can shed light on biological events as long as 500 Myr ago and as recently as 20,000 years ago. Conserved segments between human and mouse Humans and mice shared a common ancestor about 100 Myr ago. Despite the 200 Myr of evolutionary distance between the species, a signi®cant fraction of genes show synteny between the two, being preserved within conserved segments. Genes tightly linked in one mammalian species tend to be linked in others. In fact, conserved segments have been observed in even more distant species: humans show conserved segments with ®sh350,351 and even with invertebrates such as ¯y and worm352. In general, the likelihood that a syntenic relationship will be disrupted correlates with the physical distance between the loci and the evolutionary distance between the species. Studying conserved segments between human and mouse has several uses. First, conservation of gene order has been used to identify likely orthologues between the species, particularly when investigating disease phenotypes. Second, the study of conserved segments among genomes helps us to deduce evolutionary ancestry.
400
2

350
3

300 250 200 150 100 50 0
32 28 8 7 1 4 5 10

17 15 12 9 36 23 21 37 13 29 20 11 34 22 19 35 33 18 14 27 26 31 30 24 25 16

6

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

Human (number of genes)

Figure 44 Relative expansions of protein families between human and ¯y. These data have not been normalized for proteomic size differences. Blue line, equality between normalized family sizes in the two organisms. Green line, equality between unnormalized family sizes. Numbered InterPro entries: (1) immunoglobulin domain [IPR003006]; (2) zinc ®nger, C2H2 type [IPR000822]; (3) eukaryotic protein kinase [IPR000719]; (4) rhodopsinlike GPCR superfamily [IPR000276]; (5) ATP/GTP-binding site motif A (P-loop) [IPR001687]; (6) reverse transcriptase (RNA-dependent DNA polymerase) [IPR000477]; (7) RNA-binding region RNP-1 (RNA recognition motif) [IPR000504]; (8) G-proteinb WD40 repeats [IPR001680]; (9) ankyrin repeat [IPR002110]; (10) homeobox domain [IPR001356]; (11) PH domain [IPR001849]; (12) EF-hand family [IPR002048]; (13) EGFlike domain [IPR000561]; (14) Src homology 3 (SH3) domain [IPR001452]; (15) RING ®nger [IPR001841]; (16) KRAB box [IPR001909]; (17) leucine-rich repeat [IPR001611]; (18) ®bronectin type III domain [IPR001777]; (19) PDZ domain (also known as DHR or GLGF) [IPR001478]; (20) TPR repeat [IPR001440]; (21) helicase C-terminal domain [IPR001650]; (22) ion transport protein [IPR002216]; (23) helix±loop±helix DNA-binding domain [IPR001092]; (24) cadherin domain [IPR002126]; (25) intermediate ®lament proteins [IPR001664]; (26) C2 domain [IPR000008]; (27) Src homology 2 (SH2) domain [IPR000980]; (28) serine proteases, trypsin family [IPR001254]; (29) BTB/POZ domain [IPR000210]; (30) tyrosine-speci®c protein phosphatase and dual speci®city protein phosphatase family [IPR000387]; (31) collagen triple helix repeat [IPR000087]; (32) esterase/lipase/thioesterase [IPR000379]; (33) neutral zinc metallopeptidases, zincbinding region [IPR000130]; (34) ATP-binding transport protein, 2nd P-loop motif [IPR001051]; (35) ABC transporters family [IPR001617]; (36) cytochrome P450 enzyme [IPR001128]; (37) insect cuticle protein [IPR000618].
908

And third, detailed comparative maps may assist in the assembly of the mouse sequence, using the human sequence as a scaffold. Two types of linkage conservation are commonly described353. `Conserved synteny' indicates that at least two genes that reside on a common chromosome in one species are also located on a common chromosome in the other species. Syntenic loci are said to lie in a `conserved segment' when not only the chromosomal position but the linear order of the loci has been preserved, without interruption by other chromosomal rearrangements. An initial survey of homologous loci in human and mouse354 suggested that the total number of conserved segments would be about 180. Subsequent estimates based on increasingly detailed comparative maps have remained close to this projection353,355,356 (http://www.informatics.jax.org). The distribution of segment lengths has corresponded reasonably well to the truncated negative exponential curve predicted by the random breakage model357. The availability of a draft human genome sequence allows the ®rst global human±mouse comparison in which human physical distances can be measured in Mb, rather than cM or orthologous gene counts. We identi®ed likely orthologues by reciprocal comparison of the human and mouse mRNAs in the LocusLink database, using megaBLAST. For each orthologous pair, we mapped the location of the human gene in the draft genome sequence and then checked the location of the mouse gene in the Mouse Genome Informatics database (http://www.informatics.jax.org). Using a conservative threshold, we identi®ed 3,920 orthologous pairs in which the human gene could be mapped on the draft genome sequence with high con®dence. Of these, 2,998 corresponding mouse genes had a known position in the mouse genome. We then searched for de®nitive conserved segments, de®ned as human regions containing orthologues of at least two genes from the same mouse chromosome region (, 15 cM) without interruption by segments from other chromosomes. We identi®ed 183 de®nitive conserved segments (Fig. 46). The average segment length was 15.4 Mb, with the largest segment being 90.5 Mb and the smallest 24 kb. There were also 141 `singletons', segments that contained only a single locus; these are not counted in the statistics. Although some of these could be short conserved segments, they could also re¯ect incorrect choices of orthologues or problems with the human or mouse maps. Because of this conservative approach, the observed number of de®nitive segments is likely be lower than the correct total. One piece of evidence for this conclusion comes from a more detailed analysis on human chromosome 7 (ref. 358), which identi®ed 20 conserved segments, of which three were singletons. Our analysis revealed only 13 de®nitive segments on this chromosome, with nine singletons. The frequency of observing a particular gene count in a conserved segment is plotted on a logarithmic scale in Fig. 47. If chromosomal breaks occur in a random fashion (as has been proposed) and differences in gene density are ignored, a roughly straight line should result. There is a clear excess for n = 1, suggesting that 50% or more of the singletons are indeed artefactual. Thus, we estimate that true number of conserved segments is around 190±230, in good agreement with the original Nadeau±Taylor prediction354. Figure 48 shows a plot of the frequency of lengths of conserved segments, where the x-axis scale is shown in Mb. As before, there is a fair amount of scatter in the data for the larger segments (where the numbers are small), but the trend appears to be consistent with a random breakage model. We attempted to ascertain whether the breakpoint regions have any special characteristics. This analysis was complicated by imprecision in the positioning of these breaks, which will tend to blur any relationships. With 2,998 orthologues, the average interval within which a break is known to have occurred is about 1.1 Mb. We compared the aggregate features of these breakpoint intervals with the genome as a whole. The mean gene density was lower in breakpoint regions than in the conserved segments (13.8 versus
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

Fly (number of genes)

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
18.6 per Mb). This suggests that breakpoints may be more likely to occur or to undergo ®xation in gene-poor intervals than in generich intervals. The occurrence of breakpoints may be promoted by homologous recombination among repeated sequences359. When the sequence of the mouse genome is ®nished, this analysis can be revisited more precisely. A number of examples of extended conserved segments and syntenies are apparent in Fig. 46. As has been noted, almost all human genes on chromosome 17 are found on mouse chromosome 11, with two members of the placental lactogen family from mouse 13 inserted. Apart from two singleton loci, human chromosome 20 appears to be entirely orthologous to mouse chromosome 2, apparently in a single segment. The largest apparently contiguous conserved segment in the human genome is on chromosome 4, including roughly 90.5 Mb of human DNA that is orthologous to mouse chromosome 5. This analysis also allows us to infer the likely location of thousands of mouse genes for which the human orthologue has been located in the draft genome sequence but the mouse locus has not yet been mapped. With about 200 conserved segments between mouse and human and about 100 Myr of evolution from their common ancestor360, we obtain an estimated rate of about 1.0 chromosomal rearrangement being ®xed per Myr. However, there is good evidence that the rate of chromosomal rearrangement (like the rate of nucleotide substitutions; see above) differs between the two species. Among mammals, rodents may show unusually rapid chromosome alteration. By comparison, very few rearrangements have been observed among primates, and studies of a broader array of mammalian orders, including cats, cows, sheep and pigs, suggest an average rate of chromosome alteration of only about 0.2 rearrangements per Myr in these lineages361. Additional evidence that rodents are outliers comes from a recent analysis of synteny between the human and zebra®sh genomes. From a study of 523 orthologues, it was possible to project 418 conserved segments350. Assuming 400 Myr since a common vertebrate ancestor of zebra®sh and humans362, we obtain an estimate of 0.52 rearrangements per Myr. Recent estimates of rearrangement rates in plants have suggested bimodality, with some pairs showing rates of 0.15±0.41 rearrangements per Myr, and others showing higher rates of 1.1±1.3 rearrangements per Myr363. With additional detailed genome maps of multiple species, it should be possible to determine whether this particular molecular clock is truly operating at a different rate in various branches of the evolutionary tree, and whether variations in that rate are bimodal or continuous. It should also be possible to reconstruct the karyotypes of common ancestors. Ancient duplicated segments in the human genome Another approach to genomic history is to study segmental duplications within the human genome. Earlier, we discussed examples of recent duplications of genomic segments to pericentromeric and subtelomeric regions. Most of these events appear to be evolutionary dead-ends resulting in nonfunctional pseudogenes; however, segmental duplication is also an important mode of evolutionary innovation: a duplication permits one copy of each gene to drift and potentially to acquire a new function. Segmental duplications can occur through unequal crossing over to create gene families in speci®c chromosomal regions. This mechanism can create both small families, such as the ®ve related genes of the b-globin cluster on chromosome 11, and large ones, such as the olfactory receptor gene clusters, which together contain nearly 1,000 genes and pseudogenes.

Worm
POZ:~143
MATH

Fly
POZ:~95
C2H2 C2H2

Human
POZ:~140
C2H2 C2H2 C2H2 C2H2 C2H2 C2H2

Homeodomain:~90
Paired

Homeodomain:~92
Paired

Homeodomain:~220
Paired

POZ
K

HD HD

HD Lim HD

POZ POZ

HD HD

HD Lim HD

POZ POZ

HD HD

HD Lim HD

POZ POZ

Pou

A

Pou

bZip

Pou

C2H2 C2H2

Zn

LB

C4DM

SAZ

SAZ SAZ

C2H2 C2H2 C2H2 C2H2 C2H2 C2H2

Krab

Scan

bHLH:53
bHIH bHIH
PAS PAS

bHLH:105
bHIH bHIH
PAS PAS

Unique and shared domain organizations in animals
C5

Tig
P53F

Tig

Olf-1
CG-1 ank ank

P53F

Tig

Fly
CDP1

HBP-1
ATX HMG

NFAT
P53F

NFKB
ank ank ank ank ank

Tig

AND-1
wd wd wd wd wd wd wd wd

Hf

POZ

A A A A A A A A A A

KIAA0833
PHD P53F Sh2

P53
MeF YCS

HMG

Histone fold
S SPRy ATPase

UBF-1 SAF-A F49E12.6
E2F E2F C2H2 C2H2

STAT
SSRP HMG

SAZ HMG HMG HMG HMG HMG

CGBP
kdwk my

ZHX-1
HD HD HD HD HD A

HMG MTF

SSRP

DEAF-1

Worm Unique to fly or worm

Ancient architectures conserved in all animals

Shared by fly and human

Unique to human

Figure 45 Lineage-speci®c expansions of domains and architectures of transcription factors. Top, speci®c families of transcription factors that have been expanded in each of the proteomes. Approximate numbers of domains identi®ed in each of the (nearly) complete proteomes representing the lineages are shown next to the domains, and some of the most common architectures are shown. Some are shared by different animal lineages; others are lineage-speci®c. Bottom, samples of architectures from transcription factors that are shared by all animals (ancient architectures), shared by ¯y and human and unique to each lineage. Domains: K, kelch; HD, homeodomain; Zn, zinc-binding domain; LB, ligand-binding domain; C4DM, novel Zn cluster with four cysteines, probably involved in protein±protein interactions (L. Aravind, unpublished); MATH, meprin-associated TRAF
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

domain; CG-1, novel domain in KIAA0909-like transcription factors (L. Aravind, unpublished); MTF, myelin transcription factor domain; SAZ, specialized Myb-like helixturn-helix (HTH) domain found in Stonewall, ADF-1 and Zeste (L. Aravind, unpublished); A, AT-hook motif; E2F, winged HTH DNA-binding domain; GHL, gyraseB-histidine kinaseMutL ATPase domain; ATX, ATaXin domain; RFX, RFX winged HTH DNA binding domain; My, MYND domain; KDWK, KDWK DNA-binding domain; POZ, Pox zinc ®nger domain; S, SAP domain; P53F, P53 fold domain; HF, histone fold; ANK, ankyrin repeat; TIG, transcription factor Ig domain; SSRP, structure-speci®c recognition protein domain; C5, 5-cysteine metal binding domain; C2H2, classic zinc ®nger domain; WD, WD40 repeats.

C2H2 C2H2 C2H2 C2H2 C2H2 C2H2

NHR:~230

C4DM:80

SAZ (MYB-like):35

Krab:~220

Scan:~50

PMS-1
GHL
HMG

RFX5
RFX

A

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

909

articles
The most extreme mechanism is whole-genome duplication (WGD), through a polyploidization event in which a diploid organism becomes tetraploid. Such events are classi®ed as autopolyploidy or allopolyploidy, depending on whether they involve hybridization between members of the same species or different species. Polyploidization is common in the plant kingdom, with many known examples among wild and domesticated crop species. Alfalfa (Medicago sativa) is a naturally occurring autotetraploid364, and Nicotiana tabacum, some species of cotton (Gossypium) and several of the common brassicas are allotetraploids containing pairs of `homeologous' chromosome pairs. In principle, WGD provides the raw material for great bursts of innovation by allowing the duplication and divergence of entire pathways. Ohno365 suggested that WGD has played a key role in evolution. There is evidence for an ancient WGD event in the ancestry of yeast and several independent such events in the ancestry of mustard weed366±369. Such ancient WGD events can be hard to detect because only a minority of the duplicated loci may be retained, with the result that the genes in duplicated segments cannot be aligned in a one-to-one correspondence but rather require many gaps. In addition, duplicated segments may be subsequently rearranged. For example, the ancient duplication in the yeast genome appears to have been followed by loss of more than 90% of the newly duplicated genes366. One of the most controversial hypotheses about vertebrate evolution is the proposal that two WGD events occurred early in the vertebrate lineage, around the time of jawed ®shes some 500 Myr ago. Some authors370±373 have seen support for this theory in the fact that many human genes occur in sets of four homologuesÐmost notably the four extensive HOX gene clusters on chromosomes 2, 7, 12 and 17, whose duplication dates to around the correct time. However, other authors have disputed this interpretation374, suggesting that these cases may re¯ect unrelated duplications of speci®c regions rather than successive WGD. We analysed the draft genome sequence for evidence that might bear on this question. The analysis provides many interesting observations, but no convincing evidence of ancient WGD. We looked for evidence of pairs of chromosomal regions containing many homologous genes. Although we found many pairs containing a few homologous genes, the human genome does not appear to contain any pairs of regions where the density of duplicated genes approaches the densities seen in yeast or mustard weed366±369. We also examined human proteins in the IPI for which the orthologues among ¯y or worm proteins occur in the ratios 2:1:1, 3:1:1, 4:1:1 and so on (Fig. 49). The number of such families falls smoothly, with no peak at four and some instances of ®ve or more homologues. Although this does not rule out two rounds of WGD followed by extensive gene loss and some unrelated gene duplication, it provides no support for the theory. More probatively, if two successive rounds of genome duplication occurred, phylogenetic analysis of the proteins having 4:1:1 ratios between human, ¯y and worm would be expected to show more trees with the topology (A,B)(C,D) for the human sequences than (A,(B,(C,D)))375. However, of 57 sets studied carefully, only 24% of the trees constructed from the 4:1:1 set have the former topology; this is not signi®cantly different from what would be expected under the hypothesis of random sequential duplication of individual loci.

100

Occurrences 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

10

1 0 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Genes per conserved segment

Figure 47 Distribution of number of genes per conserved segment between human and mouse genomes.

100

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

X

Y

Occurrences

10

1 11

2 12

3 13

4 14

5 15

6 16

7 17

8 18

9 19

10 X Y

1 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90

Figure 46 Conserved segments in the human and mouse genome. Human chromosomes, with segments containing at least two genes whose order is conserved in the mouse genome as colour blocks. Each colour corresponds to a particular mouse chromosome. Centromeres, subcentromeric heterochromatin of chromosomes 1, 9 and 16, and the repetitive short arms of 13, 14, 15, 21 and 22 are in black.
910

Conserved segment length (Mb)

Figure 48 Distribution of lengths (in 5-Mb bins) of conserved segments between human and mouse genomes, omitting singletons.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
We also searched for sets of four chromosomes where there are multiple genes with homologues on each of the four. The strongest example was chromosomes 2, 7, 12 and 17, containing the HOX clusters as well as additional genes. These four chromosomes appear to have an excess of quadruplicated genes. The genes are not all clustered in a single region; this may re¯ect intrachromosomal rearrangement since the duplication of these genes, or it may indicate that they result from several independent events. Of the genes with homologues on chromosomes 2, 12 and 17, many of those missing on chromosome 7 are clustered on chromosome 3, suggesting a translocation. Several additional examples of groups of four chromosomes were found, although they were connected by fewer homologous genes. Although the analyses are sensitive to the imperfect quality of the gene predictions, our results so far are insuf®cient to settle whether two rounds of WGD occurred around 500 Myr ago. It may be possible to resolve the issue by systematically estimating the time of each of the many gene duplication events on the basis of sequence divergence, although this is beyond the scope of this report. Another approach to determining whether a widespread duplication occurred at a particular time in vertebrate evolution would be to sequence the genomes of organisms whose lineages diverged from vertebrates at appropriate times, such as amphioxus. genome97 and sheds light on the unique properties and history of each genomic region. The average heterozygosity at a locus will tend to increase in proportion to the local mutation rate and the `age' of the locus (which can be de®ned as the average number of generations since the most recent common ancestor of two randomly chosen copies in the population). For example, positive selection can cause a locus to be unusually `young' and balancing selection can cause it to be unusually `old'. An extreme example is the HLA region, in which a high SNP density is observed, re¯ecting the fact that diverse HLA haplotypes have been maintained for many millions of years by balancing selection and greatly predate the origin of the human species. SNPs can also be used to study linkage disequilibrium in the human genome376. Linkage disequilibrium refers to the persistence of ancestral haplotypesÐthat is, genomic segments carrying particular combinations of alleles descended from a common ancestor. It can provide a powerful tool for mapping disease genes377,378 and for probing population history379±381. There has been considerably controversy concerning the typical distance over which linkage disequilibrium extends in the human genome382±387. With the collection of SNPs now available, it should be possible to resolve this important issue.

Recent history from human polymorphism

The recent history of genomic segments can be probed by studying the properties of SNPs segregating in the current human population. The sequence information generated in the course of this project has yielded a huge collection of SNPs. These SNPs were extracted in two ways: by comparing overlapping large-insert clones derived from distinct haplotypes (either different individuals or different chromosomes within an individual) and by comparing random reads from whole-genome shotgun libraries derived from multiple individuals. The analysis con®rms an average heterozygosity rate in the human population of about 1 in 1,300 bp (ref. 97). More than 1.42 million SNPs have been assembled into a genome-wide map and are analysed in detail in an accompanying paper97. SNP density is also displayed across the genome in Fig. 9. The SNPs have an average spacing of 1.9 kb and 63% of 5-kb intervals contain a SNP. These polymorphisms are of immediate utility for medical genetic studies. Whereas investigators studying a gene previously had to expend considerable effort to discover polymorphisms across the region of interest, the current collection now provides then with about 15 SNPs for gene loci of average size. The density of SNPs (adjusted for ascertainmentÐthat is, polymorphisms per base screened) varies considerably across the

Applications to medicine and biology
In most research papers, the authors can only speculate about future applications of the work. Because the genome sequence has been released on a daily basis over the past four years, however, we can already cite many direct applications. We focus on a handful of applications chosen primarily from medical research.
Disease genes

Human(x):Fly(1):Worm(1) 1,400 1,200 1,000 Frequency 800 600 400 200 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11+

No. of human paralogues

Figure 49 Number of human paralogues of genes having single orthologues in worm and ¯y.
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

A key application of human genome research has been the ability to ®nd disease genes of unknown biochemical function by positional cloning388. This method involves mapping the chromosomal region containing the gene by linkage analysis in affected families and then scouring the region to ®nd the gene itself. Positional cloning is powerful, but it has also been extremely tedious. When the approach was ®rst proposed in the early 1980s9, a researcher wishing to perform positional cloning had to generate genetic markers to trace inheritance; perform chromosomal walking to obtain genomic DNA covering the region; and analyse a region of around 1 Mb by either direct sequencing or indirect gene identi®cation methods. The ®rst two barriers were eliminated with the development in the mid-1990s of comprehensive genetic and physical maps of the human chromosomes, under the auspices of the Human Genome Project. The remaining barrier, however, has continued to be formidable. All that is changing with the availability of the human draft genome sequence. The human genomic sequence in public databases allows rapid identi®cation in silico of candidate genes, followed by mutation screening of relevant candidates, aided by information on gene structure. For a mendelian disorder, a gene search can now often be carried out in a matter of months with only a modestly sized team. At least 30 disease genes55,389±422 (Table 26) have been positionally cloned in research efforts that depended directly on the publicly available genome sequence. As most of the human sequence has only arrived in the past twelve months, it is likely that many similar discoveries are not yet published. In addition, there are many cases in which the genome sequence played a supporting role, such as providing candidate microsatellite markers for ®ner genetic linkage analysis. The genome sequence has also helped to reveal the mechanisms leading to some common chromosomal deletion syndromes. In several instances, recurrent deletions have been found to result from homologous recombination and unequal crossing over between large, nearly identical intrachromosomal duplications. Examples
911

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
include the DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome region on chromosome 22 (ref. 238) and the Williams±Beuren syndrome recurrent deletion on chromosome 7 (ref. 239). The availability of the genome sequence also allows rapid identi®cation of paralogues of disease genes, which is valuable for two reasons. First, mutations in a paralogous gene may give rise to a related genetic disease. A good example, discovered through use of the genome sequence, is achromatopsia (complete colour blindness). The CNGA3 gene, encoding the a-subunit of the cone photoreceptor cyclic GMP-gated channel, had been shown to harbour mutations in some families with achromatopsia. Computational searching of the genome sequences revealed the paralogous gene encoding the corresponding b-subunit, CNGB3 (which had not been apparent from EST databases). The CNGB3 gene was rapidly shown to be the cause of achromatopsia in other families407,408. Another example is provided by the presenilin-1 and presenilin-2 genes, in which mutations can cause early-onset Alzheimer's disease423,424. Second, the paralogue may provide an opportunity for therapeutic intervention, as exempli®ed by attempts to reactivate the fetally expressed haemoglobin genes in individuals with sickle cell disease or b-thalassaemia, caused by mutations in the b-globin gene425. We undertook a systematic search for paralogues of 971 known human disease genes with entries in both the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/Omim/) and either the SwissProt or TrEMBL protein databases. We identi®ed 286 potential paralogues (with the requirement of a match of at least 50 amino acids with identity greater than 70% but less than 90% if on the same chromosome, and less than 95% if on a different chromosome). Although this analysis may have identi®ed some pseudogenes, 89% of the matches showed homology over more than one exon in the new target sequence, suggesting that many are functional. This analysis shows the potential for rapid identi®cation of disease gene paralogues in silico. Drug targets Over the past century, the pharmaceutical industry has largely depended upon a limited set of drug targets to develop new therapies. A recent compendium426,427 lists 483 drug targets as accounting for virtually all drugs on the market. Knowing the complete set of human genes and proteins will greatly expand the search for suitable drug targets. Although only a minority of human genes may be drug targets, it has been predicted that the number will exceed several thousand, and this prospect has led to a massive expansion of genomic research in pharmaceutical research and development. A few examples will illustrate the point. (1) The neurotransmitter serotonin (5-HT) mediates rapid excitatory responses through ligand-gated channels. The previously identi®ed 5-HT3A receptor gene produces functional receptors, but with a much smaller conductance than observed in vivo. Cross-hybridization experiments and analysis of ESTs failed to reveal any other homologues of the known receptor. Recently, however, by searching the human draft genome sequence at low stringency, a putative homologue was identi®ed within a PAC clone from the long arm of chromosome 11 (ref. 428). The homologue was shown to be expressed in the amygdala, caudate and hippocampus, and a full-length cDNA was subsequently obtained. The gene, which codes for a serotonin receptor, was named 5-HT3B. When assembled in a heterodimer with 5-HT3A, it was shown to account for the large-conductance neuronal serotonin channel. Given the central role of the serotonin pathway in mood disorders and schizophrenia, the discovery of a major new therapeutic target is of considerable interest. (2) The contractile and in¯ammatory actions of the cysteinyl leukotrienes, formerly known as the slow reacting substance of anaphylaxis (SRS-A), are mediated through speci®c receptors. The second such receptor, CysLT2, was identi®ed using the combination of a rat EST and the human genome sequence. This led to the cloning of a gene with 38% amino-acid identity to the only other receptor that had previously been identi®ed429. This new receptor, which shows high-af®nity binding to several leukotrienes, maps to a region of chromosome 13 that is linked to atopic asthma. The gene is expressed in airway smooth muscles and in the heart. As the leukotriene pathway has been a signi®cant target for the development of drugs against asthma, the discovery of a new receptor has obvious and important consequences. (3) Abundant deposition of b-amyloid in senile plaques is the hallmark of Alzheimer's disease. b-Amyloid is generated by proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). One of the enzymes involved is the b-site APP-cleaving enzyme (BACE), which is a transmembrane aspartyl protease. Computational searching of the public human draft genome sequence recently identi®ed a new sequence homologous to BACE, encoding a protein now named BACE2430,431. BACE2, which has 52% amino-acid sequence identity to BACE, contains two active protease sites and maps to the obligatory Down's syndrome region of chromosome 21, as does APP. This raises the question of whether the extra copies of both BACE2 and APP may contribute to accelerated deposition of b-amyloid in the brains of Down's syndrome patients. The development of antagonists to BACE and BACE2 represents a promising approach to preventing Alzheimer's disease. Given these examples, we undertook a systematic effort to identify paralogues of the classic drug target proteins in the draft genome sequence. The target list427 was used to identify 603 entries in the SwissProt database with unique accession numbers. These were then searched against the current genome sequence database, using the requirement that a match should have 70±100% identity to at least 50 amino acids. Matches to named proteins were ignored, as we assumed that these represented known homologues. We found 18 putative novel paralogues (Table 27), including apparent dopamine receptors, purinergic receptors and insulin-like growth factor receptors. In six cases, the novel paralogue matches at least one EST, adding con®dence that this search process can identify novel functional genes. For the remaining 12 putative paralogues without an EST match, all have long ORFs and all but
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

Table 26 Disease genes positionally cloned using the draft genome sequence
Locus BRCA2 AIRE PEX1 PDS XLP DFNA5 ATP2A2 SEDL WISP3 CCM1 COL11A2/DFNA13 LGMD 2G EVC ACTN4 SCN1A AASS NDRG1 CNGB3 MUL USH1C MYH9 PRKAR1A MYH9 SCA10 OPA1 XLCSNB FGF23 GAN AAAS HSPG2 Disorder Breast cancer susceptibility Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1 or APECED) Peroxisome biogenesis disorder Pendred syndrome X-linked lymphoproliferative disease Nonsyndromic deafness Darier's disease X-linked spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda Progressive pseudorheumatoid dysplasia Cerebral cavernous malformations Nonsyndromic deafness Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy Ellis-Van Creveld syndrome, Weyer's acrodental dysostosis Familial focal segmental glomerulosclerosis Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus type 2 Familial hyperlysinaemia Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy-Lom Total colour-blindness Mulibrey nanism Usher type 1C May-Hegglin anomaly Carney's complex Nonsyndromic hereditary deafness DFNA17 Spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 Optic atrophy X-linked congenital stationary night blindness Hypophosphataemic rickets Giant axonal neuropathy Triple-A syndrome Schwartz-Jampel syndrome Reference(s) 55 389 390, 391 392 393 394 395 396 397 398, 399 400 401 402 403 404 405 406 407, 408 409 410, 411 412, 413 414 415 416 417 418 419 420 421 422

.............................................................................................................................................................................

912

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
one show similarity spanning multiple exons separated by introns, so these are not processed pseudogenes. They are likely to represent interesting new candidate drug targets. Basic biology Although the examples above re¯ect medical applications, there are also many similar applications to basic physiology and cell biology. To cite one satisfying example, the publicly available sequence was used to solve a mystery that had vexed investigators for several decades: the molecular basis of bitter taste432. Humans and other animals are polymorphic for response to certain bitter tastes. Recently, investigators mapped this trait in both humans and mice and then searched the relevant region of the human draft genome sequence for G-protein coupled receptors. These studies led, in quick succession, to the discovery of a new family of such proteins, the demonstration that they are expressed almost exclusively in taste buds, and the experimental con®rmation that the receptors in cultured cells respond to speci®c bitter substances433±435. months. All chromosomes should be essentially completed by 2003, if not sooner. Finally, techniques must be developed to close recalcitrant gaps. Several hundred such gaps in the euchromatic sequence will probably remain in the genome after exhaustive screening of existing large-insert libraries. New methodologies will be needed to recover sequence from these segments, and to de®ne biological reasons for their lack of representation in standard libraries. Ideally, it would be desirable to obtain complete sequence from all heterochromatic regions, such as centromeres and ribosomal gene clusters, although most of this sequence will consist of highly polymorphic tandem repeats containing few protein-coding genes. Developing the IGI and IPI The draft genome sequence has provided an initial look at the human gene content, but many ambiguities remain. A high priority will be to re®ne the IGI and IPI to the point where they accurately re¯ect every gene and every alternatively spliced form. Several steps are needed to reach this ambitious goal. Finishing the human sequence will assist in this effort, but the experiences gained on chromosomes 21 and 22 show that sequence alone is not enough to allow complete gene identi®cation. One powerful approach is cross-species sequence comparison with related organisms at suitable evolutionary distances. The sequence coverage from the puffer®sh T. nigroviridis has already proven valuable in identifying potential exons292; this work is expected to continue from its current state of onefold coverage to reach at least ®vefold coverage later this year. The genome sequence of the laboratory mouse will provide a particularly powerful tool for exon identi®cation, as sequence similarity is expected to identify 95±97% of the exons, as well as a signi®cant number of regulatory domains436±438. A public-private consortium is speeding this effort, by producing freely accessible whole-genome shotgun coverage that can be readily used for cross-species comparison439. More than onefold coverage from the C57BL/6J strain has already been completed and threefold is expected within the next few months. In the slightly longer term, a program is under way to produce a ®nished sequence of the laboratory mouse. Another important step is to obtain a comprehensive collection of full-length human cDNAs, both as sequences and as actual clones. The Mammalian Gene Collection project has been underway for a year18 and expects to produce 10,000±15,000 human full-length cDNAs over the coming year, which will be available without restrictions on use. The Genome Exploration Group of the RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center is similarly developing a collection of cDNA clones from mouse309, which is a valuable complement

The next steps
Considerable progress has been made in human sequencing, but much remains to be done to produce a ®nished sequence. Even more work will be required to extract the full information contained in the sequence. Many of the key next steps are already underway. Finishing the human sequence The human sequence will serve as a foundation for biomedical research in the years ahead, and it is thus crucial that the remaining gaps be ®lled and ambiguities be resolved as quickly as possible. This will involve a three-step program. The ®rst stage involves producing ®nished sequence from clones spanning the current physical map, which covers more than 96% of the euchromatic regions of the genome. About 1 Gb of ®nished sequence is already completed. Almost all of the remaining clones are already sequenced to at least draft coverage, and the rest have been selected for sequencing. All clones are expected to reach `full shotgun' coverage (8±10-fold redundancy) by about mid-2001 and ®nished form (99.99% accuracy) not long thereafter, using established and increasingly automated protocols. The next stage will be to screen additional libraries to close gaps between clone contigs. Directed probing of additional large-insert clone libraries should close many of the remaining gaps. Unclosed gaps will be sized by FISH techniques or other methods. Two chromosomes, 22 and 21, have already been assembled in this `essentially complete' form in this manner93,94, and chromosomes 20, Y, 19, 14 and 7 are likely to reach this status in the next few

Table 27 New paralogues of common drug targets identi®ed by searching the draft human genome sequence
Drug target HGM symbol Aquaporin 7 Arachidonate 12-lipoxygenase Calcitonin Calcium channel, voltage-dependent, g-subunit DNA polymerase-d, small subunit Dopamine receptor, D1-a Dopamine receptor, D1-b Eukaryotic translation elongation factor, 1d FKBP, tacrolimus binding protein, FK506 binding protein Glutamic acid decarboxylase Glycine receptor, a1 Heparan N-deacetylase/N-sulphotransferase Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor Na,K-ATPase, a-subunit Purinergic receptor 7 (P2X), ligand-gated ion channel Tubulin, e-chain Tubulin, x-chain Voltage-gated potassium channel, KV3.3 AQP7 ALOX12 CALCA CACNG2 POLD2 DRD1 DRD5 EEF1D FKBP1B GAD1 GLRA1 NDST1 IGF1R ATP1A1 P2RX7 TUBE* TUBG1 KCNC3 Drug target SwissProt accession O14520 P18054 P01258 Q9Y698 P49005 P21728 P21918 P29692 Q16645 Q99259 P23415 P52848 P08069 P05023 Q99572 Q9UJT0 P23258 Q14003 Chromosome 9 17 11 22 7 5 4 2 2 2 5 5 15 1 12 6 17 19 IGI_M1_ctg15869_11 IGI_M1_ctg17216_23 IGI_M1_ctg14138_20 IGI_M1_ctg17137_10 IGI_M1_ctg12903_29 IGI_M1_ctg25203_33 IGI_M1_ctg17190_14 IGI_M1_ctg16401_37 IGI_M1_ctg14291_56 IGI_M1_ctg12341_103 IGI_M1_ctg16547_14 IGI_M1_ctg13263_18 IGI_M1_ctg18444_3 IGI_M1_ctg14877_54 IGI_M1_ctg15140_15 IGI_M1_ctg13826_4 IGI_M1_ctg12599_5 IGI_M1_ctg13492_5 Novel match IGI number Chromosome containing paralogue Per cent identity dbEST GenBank accession

................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... * HGM symbol unknown.

2 17 12 19 5 16 1 17 6 18 X 4 19 1 12 5 7 12

92.3 70.1 93.6 70.7 86.8 70.7 88.0 77.6 79.4 70.5 85.5 81.5 71.8 83 80.3 78.5 84.0 80.1

AW593324

AI148329 BE719683

H84353 AA970498 H49142

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

913

articles
because of the availability of tissues from all developmental time points. A challenge will be to de®ne the gene-speci®c patterns of alternative splicing, which may affect half of human genes. Existing collections of ESTs and cDNAs may allow identi®cation of the most abundant of these isoforms, but systematic exploration of this problem may require exhaustive analysis of cDNA libraries from multiple tissues or perhaps high-throughput reverse transcription± PCR studies. Deep understanding of gene function will probably require knowledge of the structure, tissue distribution and abundance of these alternative forms. Large-scale identi®cation of regulatory regions The one-dimensional script of the human genome, shared by essentially all cells in all tissues, contains suf®cient information to provide for differentiation of hundreds of different cell types, and the ability to respond to a vast array of internal and external in¯uences. Much of this plasticity results from the carefully orchestrated symphony of transcriptional regulation. Although much has been learned about the cis-acting regulatory motifs of some speci®c genes, the regulatory signals for most genes remain uncharacterized. Comparative genomics of multiple vertebrates offers the best hope for large-scale identi®cation of such regulatory sites440. Previous studies of sequence alignment of regulatory domains of orthologous genes in multiple species has shown a remarkable correlation between sequence conservation, dubbed `phylogenetic footprints'441, and the presence of binding motifs for transcription factors. This approach could be particularly powerful if combined with expression array technologies that identify cohorts of genes that are coordinately regulated, implicating a common set of cisacting regulatory sequences442±445. It will also be of considerable interest to study epigenetic modi®cations such as cytosine methylation on a genome-wide scale, and to determine their biological consequences446,447. Towards this end, a pilot Human Epigenome Project has been launched448,449. Sequencing of additional large genomes More generally, comparative genomics allows biologists to peruse evolution's laboratory notebookÐto identify conserved functional features and recognize new innovations in speci®c lineages. Determination of the genome sequence of many organisms is very desirable. Already, projects are underway to sequence the genomes of the mouse, rat, zebra®sh and the puffer®shes T. nigroviridis and Takifugu rubripes. Plans are also under consideration for sequencing additional primates and other organisms that will help de®ne key developments along the vertebrate and nonvertebrate lineages. To realize the full promise of comparative genomics, however, it needs to become simple and inexpensive to sequence the genome of any organism. Sequencing costs have dropped 100-fold over the last 10 years, corresponding to a roughly twofold decrease every 18 months. This rate is similar to `Moore's law' concerning improvements in semiconductor manufacture. In both sequencing and semiconductors, such improvement does not happen automatically, but requires aggressive technological innovation fuelled by major investment. Improvements are needed to move current dideoxy sequencing to smaller volumes and more rapid sequencing times, based upon advances such as microchannel technology. More revolutionary methods, such as mass spectrometry, singlemolecule sequencing and nanopore approaches76, have not yet been fully developed, but hold great promise and deserve strong encouragement. Completing the catalogue of human variation The human draft genome sequence has already allowed the identi®cation of more than 1.4 million SNPs, comprising a substantial proportion of all common human variation. This program should be extended to obtain a nearly complete catalogue of common variants and to identify the common ancestral haplotypes present in the population. In principle, these genetic tools should make it possible to perform association studies and linkage disequilibrium studies376 to identify the genes that confer even relatively modest risk
914

for common diseases. Launching such an intense era of human molecular epidemiology will also require major advances in the cost ef®ciency of genotyping technology, in the collection of carefully phenotyped patient cohorts and in statistical methods for relating large-scale SNP data to disease phenotype. From sequence to function The scienti®c program outlined above focuses on how the genome sequence can be mined for biological information. In addition, the sequence will serve as a foundation for a broad range of functional genomic tools to help biologists to probe function in a more systematic manner. These will need to include improved techniques and databases for the global analysis of: RNA and protein expression, protein localization, protein±protein interactions and chemical inhibition of pathways. New computational techniques will be needed to use such information to model cellular circuitry. A full discussion of these important directions is beyond the scope of this paper.

Concluding thoughts
The Human Genome Project is but the latest increment in a remarkable scienti®c program whose origins stretch back a hundred years to the rediscovery of Mendel's laws and whose end is nowhere in sight. In a sense, it provides a capstone for efforts in the past century to discover genetic information and a foundation for efforts in the coming century to understand it. We ®nd it humbling to gaze upon the human sequence now coming into focus. In principle, the string of genetic bits holds longsought secrets of human development, physiology and medicine. In practice, our ability to transform such information into understanding remains woefully inadequate. This paper simply records some initial observations and attempts to frame issues for future study. Ful®lling the true promise of the Human Genome Project will be the work of tens of thousands of scientists around the world, in both academia and industry. It is for this reason that our highest priority has been to ensure that genome data are available rapidly, freely and without restriction. The scienti®c work will have profound long-term consequences for medicine, leading to the elucidation of the underlying molecular mechanisms of disease and thereby facilitating the design in many cases of rational diagnostics and therapeutics targeted at those mechanisms. But the science is only part of the challenge. We must also involve society at large in the work ahead. We must set realistic expectations that the most important bene®ts will not be reaped overnight. Moreover, understanding and wisdom will be required to ensure that these bene®ts are implemented broadly and equitably. To that end, serious attention must be paid to the many ethical, legal and social implications (ELSI) raised by the accelerated pace of genetic discovery. This paper has focused on the scienti®c achievements of the human genome sequencing efforts. This is not the place to engage in a lengthy discussion of the ELSI issues, which have also been a major research focus of the Human Genome Project, but these issues are of comparable importance and could appropriately ®ll a paper of equal length. Finally, it is has not escaped our notice that the more we learn about the human genome, the more there is to explore. ``We shall not cease from exploration. And the end of all our exploring will be to arrive where we started, and know the place for the ®rst time.''ÐT. S. Eliot450 M
Received 7 December 2000; accepted 9 January 2001. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. È Correns, C. Untersuchungen uber die Xenien bei Zea mays. Berichte der Deutsche Botanische Gesellschaft 17, 410±418 (1899). De Vries, H. Sur la loie de disjonction des hybrides. Comptes Rendue Hebdemodaires, Acad. Sci. Paris 130, 845±847 (1900). È von Tschermack, E. Uber Kunstliche Kreuzung bei Pisum sativum. Berichte der Deutsche Botanische Gesellschaft 18, 232±239. (1900). Sanger, F. et al. Nucleotide sequence of bacteriophage F X174 DNA. Nature 265, 687±695 (1977). Sanger, F. et al. The nucleotide sequence of bacteriophage FX174. J Mol Biol 125, 225±246 (1978).

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

articles
6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50. 51. 52. 53. Sanger, F., Coulson, A. R., Hong, G. F., Hill, D. F. & Petersen, G. B. Nucleotide-sequence of bacteriophage Lambda DNA. J. Mol. Biol. 162, 729±773 (1982). Fiers, W. et al. Complete nucleotide sequence of SV40 DNA. Nature 273, 113±120 (1978). Anderson, S. et al. Sequence and organization of the human mitochondrial genome. Nature 290, 457±465 (1981). Botstein, D., White, R. L., Skolnick, M. & Davis, R. W. Construction of a genetic linkage map in man using restriction fragment length polymorphisms. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 32, 314±331 (1980). Olson, M. V. et al. Random-clone strategy for genomic restriction mapping in yeast. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 83, 7826±7830 (1986). Coulson, A., Sulston, J., Brenner, S. & Karn, J. Toward a physical map of the genome of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 83, 7821±7825 (1986). Putney, S. D., Herlihy, W. C. & Schimmel, P. A new troponin T and cDNA clones for 13 different muscle proteins, found by shotgun sequencing. Nature 302, 718±721 (1983). Milner, R. J. & Sutcliffe, J. G. Gene expression in rat brain. Nucleic Acids Res. 11, 5497±5520 (1983). Adams, M. D. et al. Complementary DNA sequencing: expressed sequence tags and human genome project. Science 252, 1651±1656 (1991). Adams, M. D. et al. Initial assessment of human gene diversity and expression patterns based upon 83 million nucleotides of cDNA sequence. Nature 377, 3±174 (1995). Okubo, K. et al. Large scale cDNA sequencing for analysis of quantitative and qualitative aspects of gene expression. Nature Genet. 2, 173±179 (1992). Hillier, L. D. et al. Generation and analysis of 280,000 human expressed sequence tags. Genome Res. 6, 807±828 (1996). Strausberg, R. L., Feingold, E. A., Klausner, R. D. & Collins, F. S. The mammalian gene collection. Science 286, 455±457 (1999). Berry, R. et al. Gene-based sequence-tagged-sites (STSs) as the basis for a human gene map. Nature Genet. 10, 415±423 (1995). Houlgatte, R. et al. The Genexpress Index: a resource for gene discovery and the genic map of the human genome. Genome Res. 5, 272±304 (1995). Sinsheimer, R. L. The Santa Cruz WorkshopÐMay 1985. Genomics 5, 954±956 (1989). Palca, J. Human genomeÐDepartment of Energy on the map. Nature 321, 371 (1986). National Research Council Mapping and Sequencing the Human Genome (National Academy Press, Washington DC, 1988). Bishop, J. E. & Waldholz, M. Genome (Simon and Schuster, New York, 1990). Kevles, D. J. & Hood, L. (eds) The Code of Codes: Scienti®c and Social Issues in the Human Genome Project (Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1992). Cook-Deegan, R. The Gene Wars: Science, Politics, and the Human Genome (W. W. Norton & Co., New York, London, 1994). Donis-Keller, H. et al. A genetic linkage map of the human genome. Cell 51, 319±337 (1987). Gyapay, G. et al. The 1993±94 Genethon human genetic linkage map. Nature Genet. 7, 246±339 (1994). Hudson, T. J. et al. An STS-based map of the human genome. Science 270, 1945±1954 (1995). Dietrich, W. F. et al. A comprehensive genetic map of the mouse genome. Nature 380, 149±152 (1996). Nusbaum, C. et al. A YAC-based physical map of the mouse genome. Nature Genet. 22, 388±393 (1999). Oliver, S. G. et al. The complete DNA sequence of yeast chromosome III. Nature 357, 38±46 (1992). Wilson, R. et al. 2.2 Mb of contiguous nucleotide sequence from chromosome III of C. elegans. Nature 368, 32±38 (1994). Chen, E. Y. et al. The human growth hormone locus: nucleotide sequence, biology, and evolution. Genomics 4, 479±497 (1989). McCombie, W. R. et al. Expressed genes, Alu repeats and polymorphisms in cosmids sequenced from chromosome 4p16.3. Nature Genet. 1, 348±353 (1992). Martin-Gallardo, A. et al. Automated DNA sequencing and analysis of 106 kilobases from human chromosome 19q13.3. Nature Genet. 1, 34±39 (1992). Edwards, A. et al. Automated DNA sequencing of the human HPRT locus. Genomics 6, 593±608 (1990). Marshall, E. A strategy for sequencing the genome 5 years early. Science 267, 783±784 (1995). Project to sequence human genome moves on to the starting blocks. Nature 375, 93±94 (1995). Shizuya, H. et al. Cloning and stable maintenance of 300-kilobase-pair fragments of human DNA in Escherichia coli using an F-factor-based vector. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 89, 8794±8797 (1992). Burke, D. T., Carle, G. F. & Olson, M. V. Cloning of large segments of exogenous DNA into yeast by means of arti®cial chromosome vectors. Science 236, 806±812 (1987). Marshall, E. A second private genome project. Science 281, 1121 (1998). Marshall, E. NIH to produce a `working draft' of the genome by 2001. Science 281, 1774±1775 (1998). Pennisi, E. Academic sequencers challenge Celera in a sprint to the ®nish. Science 283, 1822±1823 (1999). Bouck, J., Miller, W., Gorrell, J. H., Muzny, D. & Gibbs, R. A. Analysis of the quality and utility of random shotgun sequencing at low redundancies. Genome Res. 8, 1074±1084 (1998). Collins, F. S. et al. New goals for the U. S. Human Genome Project: 1998±2003. Science 282, 682±689 (1998). Sanger, F. & Coulson, A. R. A rapid method for determining sequences in DNA by primed synthesis with DNA polymerase. J. Mol. Biol. 94, 441±448 (1975). Maxam, A. M. & Gilbert, W. A new method for sequencing DNA. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 74, 560± 564 (1977). Anderson, S. Shotgun DNA sequencing using cloned DNase I-generated fragments. Nucleic Acids Res. 9, 3015±3027 (1981). Gardner, R. C. et al. The complete nucleotide sequence of an infectious clone of cauli¯ower mosaic virus by M13mp7 shotgun sequencing. Nucleic Acids Res. 9, 2871±2888 (1981). Deininger, P. L. Random subcloning of sonicated DNA: application to shotgun DNA sequence analysis. Anal. Biochem. 129, 216±223 (1983). Chissoe, S. L. et al. Sequence and analysis of the human ABL gene, the BCR gene, and regions involved in the Philadelphia chromosomal translocation. Genomics 27, 67±82 (1995). Rowen, L., Koop, B. F. & Hood, L. The complete 685-kilobase DNA sequence of the human beta T cell receptor locus. Science 272, 1755±1762 (1996). 54. Koop, B. F. et al. Organization, structure, and function of 95 kb of DNA spanning the murine T-cell receptor C alpha/C delta region. Genomics 13, 1209±1230 (1992). 55. Wooster, R. et al. Identi®cation of the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2. Nature 378, 789±792 (1995). 56. Fleischmann, R. D. et al. Whole-genome random sequencing and assembly of Haemophilus in¯uenzae Rd. Science 269, 496±512 (1995). 57. Lander, E. S. & Waterman, M. S. Genomic mapping by ®ngerprinting random clones: a mathematical analysis. Genomics 2, 231±239 (1988). 58. Weber, J. L. & Myers, E. W. Human whole-genome shotgun sequencing. Genome Res. 7, 401±409 (1997). 59. Green, P. Against a whole-genome shotgun. Genome Res. 7, 410±417 (1997). 60. Venter, J. C. et al. Shotgun sequencing of the human genome. Science 280, 1540±1542 (1998). 61. Venter, J. C. et al. The sequence of the human genome. Science 291, 1304±1351 (2001). 62. Smith, L. M. et al. Fluorescence detection in automated DNA sequence analysis. Nature 321, 674± 679 (1986). 63. Ju, J. Y., Ruan, C. C., Fuller, C. W., Glazer, A. N. & Mathies, R. A. Fluorescence energy-transfer dyelabeled primers for DNA sequencing and analysis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92, 4347±4351 (1995). 64. Lee, L. G. et al. New energy transfer dyes for DNA sequencing. Nucleic Acids Res. 25, 2816±2822 (1997). 65. Rosenblum, B. B. et al. New dye-labeled terminators for improved DNA sequencing patterns. Nucleic Acids Res. 25, 4500±4504 (1997). 66. Metzker, M. L., Lu, J. & Gibbs, R. A. Electrophoretically uniform ¯uorescent dyes for automated DNA sequencing. Science 271, 1420±1422 (1996). 67. Prober, J. M. et al. A system for rapid DNA sequencing with ¯uorescent chain-terminating dideoxynucleotides. Science 238, 336±341 (1987). 68. Reeve, M. A. & Fuller, C. W. A novel thermostable polymerase for DNA sequencing. Nature 376, 796±797 (1995). 69. Tabor, S. & Richardson, C. C. Selective inactivation of the exonuclease activity of bacteriophage T7 DNA polymerase by in vitro mutagenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 264, 6447±6458 (1989). 70. Tabor, S. & Richardson, C. C. DNA sequence analysis with a modi®ed bacteriophage T7 DNA polymeraseÐeffect of pyrophosphorolysis and metal ions. J. Biol. Chem. 265, 8322±8328 (1990). 71. Murray, V. Improved double-stranded DNA sequencing using the linear polymerase chain reaction. Nucleic Acids Res. 17, 8889 (1989). 72. Guttman, A., Cohen, A. S., Heiger, D. N. & Karger, B. L. Analytical and micropreparative ultrahigh resolution of oligonucleotides by polyacrylamide-gel high-performance capillary electrophoresis. Anal. Chem. 62, 137±141 (1990). 73. Luckey, J. A. et al. High-speed DNA sequencing by capillary electrophoresis. Nucleic Acids Res. 18, 4417±4421 (1990). 74. Swerdlow, H., Wu, S., Harke, H. & Dovichi, N. J. Capillary gel-electrophoresis for DNA sequencingÐ laser-induced ¯uorescence detection with the sheath ¯ow cuvette. J. Chromatogr. 516, 61±67 (1990). 75. Meldrum, D. Automation for genomics, part one: preparation for sequencing. Genome Res. 10, 1081±1092 (2000). 76. Meldrum, D. Automation for genomics, part two: sequencers, microarrays, and future trends. Genome Res. 10, 1288±1303 (2000). 77. Ewing, B. & Green, P. Base-calling of automated sequencer traces using phred. II. Error probabilities. Genome Res. 8, 186±194 (1998). 78. Ewing, B., Hillier, L., Wendl, M. C. & Green, P. Base-calling of automated sequencer traces using phred. I. Accuracy assessment. Genome Res. 8, 175±185 (1998). 79. Bentley, D. R. Genomic sequence information should be released immediately and freely in the public domain. Science 274, 533±534 (1996). 80. Guyer, M. Statement on the rapid release of genomic DNA sequence. Genome Res. 8, 413 (1998). 81. Dietrich, W. et al. A genetic map of the mouse suitable for typing intraspeci®c crosses. Genetics 131, 423±447 (1992). 82. Kim, U. J. et al. Construction and characterization of a human bacterial arti®cial chromosome library. Genomics 34, 213±218 (1996). 83. Osoegawa, K. et al. Bacterial arti®cial chromosome libraries for mouse sequencing and functional analysis. Genome Res. 10, 116±128 (2000). 84. Marra, M. A. et al. High throughput ®ngerprint analysis of large-insert clones. Genome Res. 7, 1072± 1084 (1997). 85. Marra, M. et al. A map for sequence analysis of the Arabidopsis thaliana genome. Nature Genet. 22, 265±270 (1999). 86. The International Human Genome Mapping Consortium. A physical map of the human genome. Nature 409, 934±941 (2001). 87. Zhao, S. et al. Human BAC ends quality assessment and sequence analyses. Genomics 63, 321±332 (2000). 88. Mahairas, G. G. et al. Sequence-tagged connectors: A sequence approach to mapping and scanning the human genome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96, 9739±9744 (1999). 89. Tilford, C. A. et al. A physical map of the human Y chromosome. Nature 409, 943±945 (2001). 90. Bentley, D. R. et al. The physical maps for sequencing human chromosomes 1, 6, 9, 10, 13, 20 and X. Nature 409, 942±943 (2001). 91. Montgomery, K. T. et al. A high-resolution map of human chromosome 12. Nature 409, 945±946 (2001). È 92. Bruls, T. et al. A physical map of human chromosome 14. Nature 409, 947±948 (2001). 93. Hattori, M. et al. The DNA sequence of human chromosome 21. Nature 405, 311±319 (2000). 94. Dunham, I. et al. The DNA sequence of human chromosome 22. Nature 402, 489±495 (1999). 95. Cox, D. et al. Radiation hybrid map of the human genome. Science (in the press). 96. Osoegawa, K. et al. An improved approach for construction of bacterial arti®cial chromosome libraries. Genomics 52, 1±8 (1998). 97. The International SNP Map Working Group. A map of human genome sequence variation containing 1.42 million single nucleotide polymorphisms. Nature 409, 928±933 (2001). 98. Collins, F. S., Brooks, L. D. & Chakravarti, A. A DNA polymorphism discovery resource for research on human genetic variation. Genome Res. 8, 1229±1231 (1998). 99. Stewart, E. A. et al. An STS-based radiation hybrid map of the human genome. Genome Res. 7, 422± 433 (1997). 100. Deloukas, P. et al. A physical map of 30,000 human genes. Science 282, 744±746 (1998). 101. Dib, C. et al. A comprehensive genetic map of the human genome based on 5,264 microsatellites.

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

915

articles
Nature 380, 152±154 (1996). 102. Broman, K. W., Murray, J. C., Shef®eld, V. C., White, R. L. & Weber, J. L. Comprehensive human genetic maps: individual and sex-speci®c variation in recombination. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63, 861± 869 (1998). 103. The BAC Resource Consortium. Integration of cytogenetic landmarks into the draft sequence of the human genome. Nature 409, 953±958 (2001). 104. Kent, W. J. & Haussler, D. GigAssembler: an algorithm for the initial assembly of the human working draft . Technical Report UCSC-CRL-00-17 (Univ. California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, 2001). 105. Morton, N. E. Parameters of the human genome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 88, 7474±7476 (1991). 106. Podugolnikova, O. A. & Blumina, M. G. Heterochromatic regions on chromosomes 1, 9, 16, and Y in children with some disturbances occurring during embryo development. Hum. Genet. 63, 183±188 (1983). 107. Lundgren, R., Berger, R. & Kristoffersson, U. Constitutive heterochromatin C-band polymorphism in prostatic cancer. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 51, 57±62 (1991). 108. Lee, C., Wevrick, R., Fisher, R. B., Ferguson-Smith, M. A. & Lin, C. C. Human centromeric DNAs. Hum. Genet. 100, 291±304 (1997). 109. Riethman, H. C. et al. Integration of telomere sequences with the draft human genome sequence. Nature 409, 953±958 (2001). 110. Pruit, K. D. & Maglott, D. R. RefSeq and LocusLink: NCBI gene-centered resources. Nucleic Acids Res. 29, 137±140 (2001). 111. Wolfsberg, T. G., McEntyre, J. & Schuler, G. D. Guide to the draft human genome. Nature 409, 824± 826 (2001). 112. Hurst, L. D. & Eyre-Walker, A. Evolutionary genomics: reading the bands. Bioessays 22, 105±107 (2000). 113. Saccone, S. et al. Correlations between isochores and chromosomal bands in the human genome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 90, 11929±11933 (1993). 114. Zoubak, S., Clay, O. & Bernardi, G. The gene distribution of the human genome. Gene 174, 95±102 (1996). 115. Gardiner, K. Base composition and gene distribution: critical patterns in mammalian genome organization. Trends Genet. 12, 519±524 (1996). 116. Duret, L., Mouchiroud, D. & Gautier, C. Statistical analysis of vertebrate sequences reveals that long genes are scarce in GC-rich isochores. J. Mol. Evol. 40, 308±317 (1995). 117. Saccone, S., De Sario, A., Della Valle, G. & Bernardi, G. The highest gene concentrations in the human genome are in telomeric bands of metaphase chromosomes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 89, 4913±4917 (1992). 118. Bernardi, G. et al. The mosaic genome of warm-blooded vertebrates. Science 228, 953±958 (1985). 119. Bernardi, G. Isochores and the evolutionary genomics of vertebrates. Gene 241, 3±17 (2000). 120. Fickett, J. W., Torney, D. C. & Wolf, D. R. Base compositional structure of genomes. Genomics 13, 1056±1064 (1992). 121. Churchill, G. A. Stochastic models for heterogeneous DNA sequences. Bull. Math. Biol. 51, 79±94 (1989). 122. Bird, A., Taggart, M., Frommer, M., Miller, O. J. & Macleod, D. A fraction of the mouse genome that is derived from islands of nonmethylated, CpG-rich DNA. Cell 40, 91±99 (1985). 123. Bird, A. P. CpG islands as gene markers in the vertebrate nucleus. Trends Genet. 3, 342±347 (1987). 124. Chan, M. F., Liang, G. & Jones, P. A. Relationship between transcription and DNA methylation. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 249, 75±86 (2000). 125. Holliday, R. & Pugh, J. E. DNA modi®cation mechanisms and gene activity during development. Science 187, 226±232 (1975). 126. Larsen, F., Gundersen, G., Lopez, R. & Prydz, H. CpG islands as gene markers in the human genome. Genomics 13, 1095±1107 (1992). 127. Tazi, J. & Bird, A. Alternative chromatin structure at CpG islands. Cell 60, 909±920 (1990). 128. Gardiner-Garden, M. & Frommer, M. CpG islands in vertebrate genomes. J. Mol. Biol. 196, 261±282 (1987). 129. Antequera, F. & Bird, A. Number of CpG islands and genes in human and mouse. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 90, 11995±11999 (1993). 130. Ewing, B. & Green, P. Analysis of expressed sequence tags indicates 35,000 human genes. Nature Genet. 25, 232±234 (2000). 131. Yu, A. Comparison of human genetic and sequence-based physical maps. Nature 409, 951±953 (2001). 132. Kaback, D. B., Guacci, V., Barber, D. & Mahon, J. W. Chromosome size-dependent control of meiotic recombination. Science 256, 228±232 (1992). 133. Riles, L. et al. Physical maps of the 6 smallest chromosomes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae at a resolution of 2.6-kilobase pairs. Genetics 134, 81±150 (1993). 134. Lynn, A. et al. Patterns of meiotic recombination on the long arm of human chromosome 21. Genome Res. 10, 1319±1332 (2000). 135. Laurie, D. A. & Hulten, M. A. Further studies on bivalent chiasma frequency in human males with normal karyotypes. Ann. Hum. Genet. 49, 189±201 (1985). 136. Roeder, G. S. Meiotic chromosomes: it takes two to tango. Genes Dev. 11, 2600±2621 (1997). 137. Wu, T.-C. & Lichten, M. Meiosis-induced double-strand break sites determined by yeast chromatin structure. Science 263, 515±518 (1994). 138. Gerton, J. L. et al. Global mapping of meiotic recombination hotspots and coldspots in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 11383±11390 (2000). 139. Li, W. -H. Molecular Evolution (Sinauer, Sunderland, Massachusetts, 1997). 140. Gregory, T. R. & Hebert, P. D. The modulation of DNA content: proximate causes and ultimate consequences. Genome Res. 9, 317±324 (1999). 141. Hartl, D. L. Molecular melodies in high and low C. Nature Rev. Genet. 1, 145±149 (2000). 142. Smit, A. F. Interspersed repeats and other mementos of transposable elements in mammalian genomes. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 9, 657±663 (1999). 143. Prak, E. L. & Haig, H. K. Jr Mobile elements and the human genome. Nature Rev. Genet. 1, 134±144 (2000). 144. Okada, N., Hamada, M., Ogiwara, I. & Ohshima, K. SINEs and LINEs share common 39 sequences: a review. Gene 205, 229±243 (1997). 145. Esnault, C., Maestre, J. & Heidmann, T. Human LINE retrotransposons generate processed pseudogenes. Nature Genet. 24, 363±367 (2000). 146. Wei, W. et al. Human L1 retrotransposition: cis-preference vs. trans-complementation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21, 1429±1439 (2001) 147. Malik, H. S., Henikoff, S. & Eickbush, T. H. Poised for contagion: evolutionary origins of the infectious abilities of invertebrate retroviruses. Genome Res. 10, 1307±1318 (2000). 148. Smit, A. F. The origin of interspersed repeats in the human genome. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 6, 743± 748 (1996). 149. Clark, J. B. & Tidwell, M. G. A phylogenetic perspective on P transposable element evolution in Drosophila. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 11428±11433 (1997). 150. Haring, E., Hagemann, S. & Pinsker, W. Ancient and recent horizontal invasions of Drosophilids by P elements. J. Mol. Evol. 51, 577±586 (2000). 151. Koga, A. et al. Evidence for recent invasion of the medaka ®sh genome by the Tol2 transposable element. Genetics 155, 273±281 (2000). 152. Robertson, H. M. & Lampe, D. J. Recent horizontal transfer of a mariner transposable element among and between Diptera and Neuroptera. Mol. Biol. Evol. 12, 850±862 (1995). 153. Simmons, G. M. Horizontal transfer of hobo transposable elements within the Drosophila melanogaster species complex: evidence from DNA sequencing. Mol. Biol. Evol. 9, 1050±1060 (1992). 154. Malik, H. S., Burke, W. D. & Eickbush, T. H. The age and evolution of non-LTR retrotransposable elements. Mol. Biol. Evol. 16, 793±805 (1999). 155. Kordis, D. & Gubensek, F. Bov-B long interspersed repeated DNA (LINE) sequences are present in Vipera ammodytes phospholipase A2 genes and in genomes of Viperidae snakes. Eur. J. Biochem. 246, 772±779 (1997). 156. Jurka, J. Repbase update: a database and an electronic journal of repetitive elements. Trends Genet. 16, 418±420 (2000). 157. Sarich, V. M. & Wilson, A. C. Generation time and genome evolution in primates. Science 179, 1144±1147 (1973). 158. Smit, A. F., Toth, G., Riggs, A. D., & Jurka, J. Ancestral, mammalian-wide subfamilies of LINE-1 repetitive sequences. J. Mol. Biol. 246, 401±417 (1995). 159. Lim, J. K. & Simmons, M. J. Gross chromosome rearrangements mediated by transposable elements in Drosophila melanogaster. Bioessays 16, 269±275 (1994). 160. Caceres, M., Ranz, J. M., Barbadilla, A., Long, M. & Ruiz, A. Generation of a widespread Drosophila inversion by a transposable element. Science 285, 415±418 (1999). 161. Gray, Y. H. It takes two transposons to tango: transposable-element-mediated chromosomal rearrangements. Trends Genet. 16, 461±468 (2000). 162. Zhang, J. & Peterson, T. Genome rearrangements by nonlinear transposons in maize. Genetics 153, 1403±1410 (1999). 163. Smit, A. F. Identi®cation of a new, abundant superfamily of mammalian LTR-transposons. Nucleic Acids Res. 21, 1863±1872 (1993). 164. Cordonnier, A., Casella, J. F. & Heidmann, T. Isolation of novel human endogenous retrovirus-like elements with foamy virus-related pol sequence. J. Virol. 69, 5890±5897 (1995). 165. Medstrand, P. & Mager, D. L. Human-speci®c integrations of the HERV-K endogenous retrovirus family. J. Virol. 72, 9782±9787 (1998). 166. Myers, E. W. et al. A whole-genome assembly of Drosophila. Science 287, 2196±2204 (2000). 167. Petrov, D. A., Lozovskaya, E. R. & Hartl, D. L. High intrinsic rate of DNA loss in Drosophila. Nature 384, 346±349 (1996). 168. Li, W. H., Ellsworth, D. L., Krushkal, J., Chang, B. H. & Hewett-Emmett, D. Rates of nucleotide substitution in primates and rodents and the generation-time effect hypothesis. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 5, 182±187 (1996). 169. Goodman, M. et al. Toward a phylogenetic classi®cation of primates based on DNA evidence complemented by fossil evidence. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 9, 585±598 (1998). 170. Kazazian, H. H. Jr & Moran, J. V. The impact of L1 retrotransposons on the human genome. Nature Genet. 19, 19±24 (1998). 171. Malik, H. S. & Eickbush, T. H. NeSL-1, an ancient lineage of site-speci®c non-LTR retrotransposons from Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 154, 193±203 (2000). 172. Casavant, N. C. et al. The end of the LINE?: lack of recent L1 activity in a group of South American rodents. Genetics 154, 1809±1817 (2000). 173. Meunier-Rotival, M., Soriano, P., Cuny, G., Strauss, F. & Bernardi, G. Sequence organization and genomic distribution of the major family of interspersed repeats of mouse DNA. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 79, 355±359 (1982). 174. Soriano, P., Meunier-Rotival, M. & Bernardi, G. The distribution of interspersed repeats is nonuniform and conserved in the mouse and human genomes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 80, 1816± 1820 (1983). 175. Goldman, M. A., Holmquist, G. P., Gray, M. C., Caston, L. A. & Nag, A. Replication timing of genes and middle repetitive sequences. Science 224, 686±692 (1984). 176. Manuelidis, L. & Ward, D. C. Chromosomal and nuclear distribution of the HindIII 1.9-kb human DNA repeat segment. Chromosoma 91, 28±38 (1984). 177. Feng, Q., Moran, J. V., Kazazian, H. H. Jr & Boeke, J. D. Human L1 retrotransposon encodes a conserved endonuclease required for retrotransposition. Cell 87, 905±916 (1996). 178. Jurka, J. Sequence patterns indicate an enzymatic involvement in integration of mammalian retroposons. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 1872±1877 (1997). 179. Arcot, S. S. et al. High-resolution cartography of recently integrated human chromosome 19-speci®c Alu fossils. J. Mol. Biol. 281, 843±856 (1998). 180. Schmid, C. W. Does SINE evolution preclude Alu function? Nucleic Acids Res. 26, 4541±4550 (1998). 181. Chu, W. M., Ballard, R., Carpick, B. W., Williams, B. R. & Schmid, C. W. Potential Alu function: regulation of the activity of double-stranded RNA-activated kinase PKR. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18, 58±68 (1998). 182. Li, T., Spearow, J., Rubin, C. M. & Schmid, C. W. Physiological stresses increase mouse short interspersed element (SINE) RNA expression in vivo. Gene 239, 367±372 (1999). 183. Liu, W. M., Chu, W. M., Choudary, P. V. & Schmid, C. W. Cell stress and translational inhibitors transiently increase the abundance of mammalian SINE transcripts. Nucleic Acids Res. 23, 1758± 1765 (1995). 184. Filipski, J. Correlation between molecular clock ticking, codon usage ®delity of DNA repair, chromosome banding and chromatin compactness in germline cells. FEBS Lett. 217, 184±186 (1987). 185. Sueoka, N. Directional mutation pressure and neutral molecular evolution. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.

916

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

articles
USA 85, 2653±2657 (1988). 186. Wolfe, K. H., Sharp, P. M. & Li, W. H. Mutation rates differ among regions of the mammalian genome. Nature 337, 283±285 (1989). 187. Bains, W. Local sequence dependence of rate of base replacement in mammals. Mutat. Res. 267, 43± 54 (1992). 188. Mathews, C. K. & Ji, J. DNA precursor asymmetries, replication ®delity, and variable genome evolution. Bioessays 14, 295±301 (1992). 189. Holmquist, G. P. & Filipski, J. Organization of mutations along the genome: a prime determinant of genome evolution. Trends Ecol. Evol. 9, 65±68 (1994). 190. Eyre-Walker, A. Evidence of selection on silent site base composition in mammals: potential implications for the evolution of isochores and junk DNA. Genetics 152, 675±683 (1999). 191. The International SNP Map Working Group. An SNP map of the human genome generated by reduced representation shotgun sequencing. Nature 407, 513±516 (2000). 192. Bohossian, H. B., Skaletsky, H. & Page, D. C. Unexpectedly similar rates of nucleotide substitution found in male and female hominids. Nature 406, 622±625 (2000). 193. Skowronski, J., Fanning, T. G. & Singer, M. F. Unit-length LINE-1 transcripts in human teratocarcinoma cells. Mol. Cell. Biol. 8, 1385±1397 (1988). 194. Boissinot, S., Chevret, P. & Furano, A. V. L1 (LINE-1) retrotransposon evolution and ampli®cation in recent human history. Mol. Biol. Evol. 17, 915±928 (2000). 195. Moran, J. V. Human L1 retrotransposition: insights and peculiarities learned from a cultured cell retrotransposition assay. Genetica 107, 39±51 (1999). 196. Kazazian, H. H. Jr et al. Haemophilia A resulting from de novo insertion of L1 sequences represents a novel mechanism for mutation in man. Nature 332, 164±166 (1988). 197. Sheen, F.-m. et al. Reading between the LINEs: Human genomic variation introduced by LINE-1 retrotransposition. Genome Res. 10, 1496±1508 (2000). 198. Dombroski, B. A., Mathias, S. L., Nanthakumar, E., Scott, A. F. & Kazazian, H. H. Jr Isolation of an active human transposable element. Science 254, 1805±1808 (1991). 199. Holmes, S. E., Dombroski, B. A., Krebs, C. M., Boehm, C. D. & Kazazian, H. H. Jr A new retrotransposable human L1 element from the LRE2 locus on chromosome 1q produces a chimaeric insertion. Nature Genet. 7, 143±148 (1994). 200. Sassaman, D. M. et al. Many human L1 elements are capable of retrotransposition. Nature Genet. 16, 37±43 (1997). 201. Dombroski, B. A., Scott, A. F. & Kazazian, H. H. Jr Two additional potential retrotransposons isolated from a human L1 subfamily that contains an active retrotransposable element. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 90, 6513±6517 (1993). 202. Kimberland, M. L. et al. Full-length human L1 insertions retain the capacity for high frequency retrotransposition in cultured cells. Hum. Mol. Genet. 8, 1557±1560 (1999). 203. Moran, J. V. et al. High frequency retrotransposition in cultured mammalian cells. Cell 87, 917±927 (1996). 204. Moran, J. V., DeBerardinis, R. J. & Kazazian, H. H. Jr Exon shuf¯ing by L1 retrotransposition. Science 283, 1530±1534 (1999). 205. Pickeral, O. K., Makalowski, W., Boguski, M. S. & Boeke, J. D. Frequent human genomic DNA transduction driven by LINE-1 retrotransposition. Genome Res. 10, 411±415 (2000). 206. Miki, Y. et al. Disruption of the APC gene by a retrotransposal insertion of L1 sequence in a colon cancer. Cancer Res. 52, 643±645 (1992). 207. Branciforte, D. & Martin, S. L. Developmental and cell type speci®city of LINE-1 expression in mouse testis: implications for transposition. Mol. Cell. Biol. 14, 2584±2592 (1994). 208. Trelogan, S. A. & Martin, S. L. Tightly regulated, developmentally speci®c expression of the ®rst open reading frame from LINE-1 during mouse embryogenesis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92, 1520± 1524 (1995). 209. Jurka, J. & Kapitonov, V. V. Sectorial mutagenesis by transposable elements. Genetica 107, 239±248 (1999). 210. Fraser, M. J., Ciszczon, T., Elick, T. & Bauser, C. Precise excision of TTAA-speci®c lepidopteran transposons piggyBac (IFP2) and tagalong (TFP3) from the baculovirus genome in cell lines from two species of Lepidoptera. Insect Mol. Biol. 5, 141±151 (1996). 211. Brosius, J. Genomes were forged by massive bombardments with retroelements and retrosequences. Genetica 107, 209±238 (1999). 212. Kruglyak, S., Durrett, R. T., Schug, M. D. & Aquadro, C. F. Equilibrium distribution of microsatellite repeat length resulting from a balance between slippage events and point mutations. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 95, 10774±10778 (1998). 213. Toth, G., Gaspari, Z. & Jurka, J. Microsatellites in different eukaryotic genomes: survey and analysis. Genome Res. 10, 967±981 (2000). 214. Ellegren, H. Heterogeneous mutation processes in human microsatellite DNA sequences. Nature Genet. 24, 400±402 (2000). 215. Ji, Y., Eichler, E. E., Schwartz, S. & Nicholls, R. D. Structure of chromosomal duplicons and their role in mediating human genomic disorders. Genome Res. 10, 597±610 (2000). 216. Eichler, E. E. Masquerading repeats: paralogous pitfalls of the human genome. Genome Res. 8, 758± 762 (1998). 217. Mazzarella, R. & D. Schlessinger, D. Pathological consequences of sequence duplications in the human genome. Genome Res. 8, 1007±1021 (1998). 218. Eichler, E. E. et al. Interchromosomal duplications of the adrenoleukodystrophy locus: a phenomenon of pericentromeric plasticity. Hum. Mol. Genet. 6, 991±1002 (1997). 219. Horvath, J. E., Schwartz, S. & Eichler, E. E. The mosaic structure of human pericentromeric DNA: a strategy for characterizing complex regions of the human genome. Genome Res. 10, 839±852 (2000). 220. Brand-Arpon, V. et al. A genomic region encompassing a cluster of olfactory receptor genes and a myosin light chain kinase (MYLK) gene is duplicated on human chromosome regions 3q13-q21 and 3p13. Genomics 56, 98±110 (1999). 221. Arnold, N., Wienberg, J., Ermert, K. & Zachau, H. G. Comparative mapping of DNA probes derived from the V kappa immunoglobulin gene regions on human and great ape chromosomes by ¯uorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 26, 147±150 (1995). 222. Eichler, E. E. et al. Duplication of a gene-rich cluster between 16p11.1 and Xq28: a novel pericentromeric-directed mechanism for paralogous genome evolution. Hum. Mol. Genet. 5, 899± 912 (1996). 223. Potier, M. et al. Two sequence-ready contigs spanning the two copies of a 200-kb duplication on human 21q: partial sequence and polymorphisms. Genomics 51, 417±426 (1998). 224. Regnier, V. et al. Emergence and scattering of multiple neuro®bromatosis (NF1)-related sequences during hominoid evolution suggest a process of pericentromeric interchromosomal transposition. Hum. Mol. Genet. 6, 9±16 (1997). 225. Ritchie, R. J., Mattei, M. G. & Lalande, M. A large polymorphic repeat in the pericentromeric region of human chromosome 15q contains three partial gene duplications. Hum. Mol. Genet. 7, 1253± 1260 (1998). 226. Trask, B. J. et al. Members of the olfactory receptor gene family are contained in large blocks of DNA duplicated polymorphically near the ends of human chromosomes. Hum. Mol. Genet. 7, 13±26 (1998). 227. Trask, B. J. et al. Large multi-chromosomal duplications encompass many members of the olfactory receptor gene family in the human genome. Hum. Mol. Genet. 7, 2007±2020 (1998). 228. van Deutekom, J. C. et al. Identi®cation of the ®rst gene (FRG1) from the FSHD region on human chromosome 4q35. Hum. Mol. Genet. 5, 581±590 (1996). 229. Zachau, H. G. The immunoglobulin kappa locusÐorÐwhat has been learned from looking closely at one-tenth of a percent of the human genome. Gene 135, 167±173 (1993). 230. Zimonjic, D. B., Kelley, M. J., Rubin, J. S., Aaronson, S. A. & Popescu, N. C. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of keratinocyte growth factor gene ampli®cation and dispersion in evolution of great apes and humans. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 11461±11465 (1997). 231. van Geel, M. et al. The FSHD region on human chromosome 4q35 contains potential coding regions among pseudogenes and a high density of repeat elements. Genomics 61, 55±65 (1999). 232. Horvath, J. E. et al. Molecular structure and evolution of an alpha satellite/non-alpha satellite junction at 16p11. Hum. Mol. Genet. 9, 113±123 (2000). 233. Guy, J. et al. Genomic sequence and transcriptional pro®le of the boundary between pericentromeric satellites and genes on human chromosome arm 10q. Hum. Mol. Genet. 9, 2029±2042 (2000). 234. Reiter, L. T., Murakami, T., Koeuth, T., Gibbs, R. A. & Lupski, J. R. The human COX10 gene is disrupted during homologous recombination between the 24 kb proximal and distal CMT1A-REPs. Hum. Mol. Genet. 6, 1595±1603 (1997). 235. Amos-Landgraf, J. M. et al. Chromosome breakage in the Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes involves recombination between large, transcribed repeats at proximal and distal breakpoints. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65, 370±386 (1999). 236. Christian, S. L., Fantes, J. A., Mewborn, S. K., Huang, B. & Ledbetter, D. H. Large genomic duplicons map to sites of instability in the Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome chromosome region (15q11q13). Hum. Mol. Genet. 8, 1025±1037 (1999). 237. Edelmann, L., Pandita, R. K. & Morrow, B. E. Low-copy repeats mediate the common 3-Mb deletion in patients with velo-cardio-facial syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64, 1076±1086 (1999). 238. Shaikh, T. H. et al. Chromosome 22-speci®c low copy repeats and the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: genomic organization and deletion endpoint analysis. Hum. Mol. Genet. 9, 489±501 (2000). 239. Francke, U. Williams-Beuren syndrome: genes and mechanisms. Hum. Mol. Genet. 8, 1947±1954 (1999). 240. Peoples, R. et al. A physical map, including a BAC/PAC clone contig, of the Williams-Beuren syndrome-deletion region at 7q11.23. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66, 47±68 (2000). 241. Eichler, E. E., Archidiacono, N. & Rocchi, M. CAGGG repeats and the pericentromeric duplication of the hominoid genome. Genome Res. 9, 1048±1058 (1999). 242. O'Keefe, C. & Eichler, E. in Comparative Genomics: Empirical and Analytical Approaches to Gene Order Dynamics, Map Alignment and the Evolution of Gene Families (eds Sankoff, D. & Nadeau, J.) 29±46 (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 2000). 243. Lander, E. S. The new genomics: Global views of biology. Science 274, 536±539 (1996). 244. Eddy, S. R. Noncoding RNA genes. Curr. Op. Genet. Dev. 9, 695±699 (1999). 245. Ban, N., Nissen, P., Hansen, J., Moore, P. B. & Steitz, T. A. The complete atomic structure of the large ribosomal subunit at 2.4 angstrom resolution. Science 289, 905±920 (2000). 246. Nissen, P., Hansen, J., Ban, N., Moore, P. B. & Steitz, T. A. The structural basis of ribosome activity in peptide bond synthesis. Science 289, 920±930 (2000). 247. Weinstein, L. B. & Steitz, J. A. Guided tours: from precursor snoRNA to functional snoRNP. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 11, 378±384 (1999). 248. Bachellerie, J.-P. & Cavaille, J. in Modi®cation and Editing of RNA (ed. Benne, H. G. a. R.) 255±272 (ASM, Washington DC, 1998). 249. Burge, C. & Sharp, P. A. Classi®cation of introns: U2-type or U12-type. Cell 91, 875±879 (1997). 250. Brown, C. J. et al. The Human Xist geneÐanalysis of a 17 kb inactive X-speci®c RNA that contains conserved repeats and is highly localized within the nucleus. Cell 71, 527±542 (1992). 251. Kickhoefer, V. A., Vasu, S. K. & Rome, L. H. Vaults are the answer, what is the question? Trends Cell Biol. 6, 174±178 (1996). 252. Hatlen, L. & Attardi, G. Proportion of the HeLa cell genome complementary to the transfer RNA and 5S RNA. J. Mol. Biol. 56, 535±553 (1971). 253. Sprinzl, M., Horn, C., Brown, M., Ioudovitch, A. & Steinberg, S. Compilation of tRNA sequences and sequences of tRNA genes. Nucleic Acids Res. 26, 148±153 (1998). 254. Long, E. O. & Dawid, I. B. Repeated genes in eukaryotes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 49, 727±764 (1980). 255. Crick, F. H. Codon±anticodon pairing: the wobble hypothesis. J. Mol. Biol. 19, 548±555 (1966). 256. Guthrie, C. & Abelson, J. in The Molecular Biology of the Yeast Saccharomyces: Metabolism and Gene Expression (eds Strathern, J. & Broach J.) 487±528 (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, New York, 1982). 257. Soll, D. & RajBhandary, U. (eds) tRNA: Structure, Biosynthesis, and Function (ASM, Washington DC, 1995). 258. Ikemura, T. Codon usage and tRNA content in unicellular and multicellular organisms. Mol. Biol. Evol. 2, 13±34 (1985). 259. Bulmer, M. Coevolution of codon usage and transfer-RNA abundance. Nature 325, 728±730 (1987). 260. Duret, L. tRNA gene number and codon usage in the C. elegans genome are co-adapted for optimal translation of highly expressed genes. Trends Genet. 16, 287±289 (2000). 261. Sharp, P. M. & Matassi, G. Codon usage and genome evolution. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 4, 851±860 (1994). 262. Buckland, R. A. A primate transfer-RNA gene cluster and the evolution of human chromosome 1. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 61, 1±4 (1992). 263. Gonos, E. S. & Goddard, J. P. Human tRNA-Glu genes: their copy number and organization. FEBS Lett. 276, 138±142 (1990). 264. Sylvester, J. E. et al. The human ribosomal RNA genes: structure and organization of the complete repeating unit. Hum. Genet. 73, 193±198 (1986).

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

917

articles
265. Sorensen, P. D. & Frederiksen, S. Characterization of human 5S ribosomal RNA genes. Nucleic Acids Res. 19, 4147±4151 (1991). 266. Timofeeva, M. et al. [Organization of a 5S ribosomal RNA gene cluster in the human genome]. Mol. Biol. (Mosk.) 27, 861±868 (1993). 267. Little, R. D. & Braaten, D. C. Genomic organization of human 5S rDNA and sequence of one tandem repeat. Genomics 4, 376±383 (1989). 268. Maden, B. E. H. The numerous modi®ed nucleotides in eukaryotic ribosomal RNA. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 39, 241±303 (1990). 269. Tycowski, K. T., You, Z. H., Graham, P. J. & Steitz, J. A. Modi®cation of U6 spliceosomal RNA is guided by other small RNAs. Mol. Cell 2, 629±638 (1998). 270. Pavelitz, T., Liao, D. Q. & Weiner, A. M. Concerted evolution of the tandem array encoding primate U2 snRNA (the RNU2 locus) is accompanied by dramatic remodeling of the junctions with ¯anking chromosomal sequences. EMBO J. 18, 3783±3792 (1999). 271. Lindgren, V., Ares, A., Weiner, A. M. & Francke, U. Human genes for U2 small nuclear RNA map to a major adenovirus 12 modi®cation site on chromosome 17. Nature 314, 115±116 (1985). 272. Van Arsdell, S. W. & Weiner, A. M. Human genes for U2 small nuclear RNA are tandemly repeated. Mol. Cell. Biol. 4, 492±499 (1984). 273. Gao, L. I., Frey, M. R. & Matera, A. G. Human genes encoding U3 snRNA associate with coiled bodies in interphase cells and are clustered on chromosome 17p11. 2 in a complex inverted repeat structure. Nucleic Acids Res. 25, 4740±4747 (1997). 274. Hawkins, J. D. A survey on intron and exon lengths. Nucleic Acids Res. 16, 9893±9908 (1988). 275. Burge, C. & Karlin, S. Prediction of complete gene structures in human genomic DNA. J. Mol. Biol. 268, 78±94 (1997). 276. Labeit, S. & Kolmerer, B. Titins: giant proteins in charge of muscle ultrastructure and elasticity. Science 270, 293±296 (1995). 277. Sterner, D. A., Carlo, T. & Berget, S. M. Architectural limits on split genes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 93, 15081±15085 (1996). 278. Sun, Q., Mayeda, A., Hampson, R. K., Krainer, A. R. & Rottman, F. M. General splicing factor SF2/ ASF promotes alternative splicing by binding to an exonic splicing enhancer. Genes Dev. 7, 2598± 2608 (1993). 279. Tanaka, K., Watakabe, A. & Shimura, Y. Polypurine sequences within a downstream exon function as a splicing enhancer. Mol. Cell. Biol. 14, 1347±1354 (1994). 280. Carlo, T., Sterner, D. A. & Berget, S. M. An intron splicing enhancer containing a G-rich repeat facilitates inclusion of a vertebrate micro-exon. RNA 2, 342±353 (1996). 281. Burset, M., Seledtsov, I. A. & Solovyev, V. V. Analysis of canonical and non-canonical splice sites in mammalian genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 4364±4375 (2000). 282. Burge, C. B., Padgett, R. A. & Sharp, P. A. Evolutionary fates and origins of U12-type introns. Mol. Cell 2, 773±785 (1998). 283. Mironov, A. A., Fickett, J. W. & Gelfand, M. S. Frequent alternative splicing of human genes. Genome Res. 9, 1288±1293 (1999). 284. Hanke, J. et al. Alternative splicing of human genes: more the rule than the exception? Trends Genet. 15, 389±390 (1999). 285. Brett, D. et al. EST comparison indicates 38% of human mRNAs contain possible alternative splice forms. FEBS Lett. 474, 83±86 (2000). 286. Dunham, I. The gene guessing game. Yeast 17, 218±224 (2000). 287. Lewin, B. Gene Expression (Wiley, New York, 1980). 288. Lewin, B. Genes IV 466±481 (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1990). 289. Smaglik, P. Researchers take a gamble on the human genome. Nature 405, 264 (2000). 290. Fields, C., Adams, M. D., White, O. & Venter, J. C. How many genes in the human genome? Nature Genet. 7, 345±346 (1994). 291. Liang, F. et al. Gene index analysis of the human genome estimates approximately 120,000 genes. Nature Genet. 25, 239±240 (2000). 292. Roest Crollius, H. et al. Estimate of human gene number provided by genome-wide analysis using Tetraodon nigroviridis DNA sequence. Nature Genet. 25, 235±238 (2000). 293. The C. elegans Sequencing Consortium. Genome sequence of the nematode C. elegans: A platform for investigating biology. Science 282, 2012±2018 (1998). 294. Rubin, G. M. et al. Comparative genomics of the eukaryotes. Science 287, 2204±2215 (2000). 295. Green, P. et al. Ancient conserved regions in new gene sequences and the protein databases. Science 259, 1711±1716 (1993). 296. Fraser, A. G. et al. Functional genomic analysis of C. elegans chromosome I by systematic RNA interference. Nature 408, 325±330 (2000). 297. Mott, R. EST_GENOME: a program to align spliced DNA sequences to unspliced genomic DNA. Comput. Appl. Biosci. 13, 477±478 (1997). 298. Florea, L., Hartzell, G., Zhang, Z., Rubin, G. M. & Miller, W. A computer program for aligning a cDNA sequence with a genomic DNA sequence. Genome Res. 8, 967±974 (1998). 299. Bailey, L. C. Jr, Searls, D. B. & Overton, G. C. Analysis of EST-driven gene annotation in human genomic sequence. Genome Res. 8, 362±376 (1998). 300. Birney, E., Thompson, J. D. & Gibson, T. J. PairWise and SearchWise: ®nding the optimal alignment in a simultaneous comparison of a protein pro®le against all DNA translation frames. Nucleic Acids Res. 24, 2730±2739 (1996). 301. Gelfand, M. S., Mironov, A. A. & Pevzner, P. A. Gene recognition via spliced sequence alignment. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 93, 9061±9066 (1996). 302. Kulp, D., Haussler, D., Reese, M. G. & Eeckman, F. H. A generalized hidden Markov model for the recognition of human genes in DNA. ISMB 4, 134±142 (1996). 303. Reese, M. G., Kulp, D., Tammana, H. & Haussler, D. GenieÐgene ®nding in Drosophila melanogaster. Genome Res. 10, 529±538 (2000). 304. Solovyev, V. & Salamov, A. The Gene-Finder computer tools for analysis of human and model organisms genome sequences. ISMB 5, 294±302 (1997). 305. Guigo, R., Agarwal, P., Abril, J. F., Burset, M. & Fickett, J. W. An assessment of gene prediction accuracy in large DNA sequences. Genome Res. 10, 1631±1642 (2000). 306. Hubbard, T. & Birney, E. Open annotation offers a democratic solution to genome sequencing. Nature 403, 825 (2000). 307. Bateman, A. et al. The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 263±266 (2000). 308. Birney, E. & Durbin, R. Using GeneWise in the Drosophila annotation experiment. Genome Res. 10, 547±548 (2000). 309. The RIKEN Genome Exploration Research Group Phase II Team and the FANTOM Consortium. Functional annotation of a full-length mouse cDNA collection. Nature 409, 685±690 (2001). 310. Basrai, M. A., Hieter, P. & Boeke, J. D. Small open reading frames: beautiful needles in the haystack. Genome Res. 7, 768±771 (1997). 311. Janin, J. & Chothia, C. Domains in proteins: de®nitions, location, and structural principles. Methods Enzymol. 115, 420±430 (1985). 312. Ponting, C. P., Schultz, J., Copley, R. R., Andrade, M. A. & Bork, P. Evolution of domain families. Adv. Protein Chem. 54, 185±244 (2000). 313. Doolittle, R. F. The multiplicity of domains in proteins. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 64, 287±314 (1995). 314. Bateman, A. & Birney, E. Searching databases to ®nd protein domain organization. Adv. Protein Chem. 54, 137±157 (2000). 315. Futreal, P. A. et al. Cancer and genomics. Nature 409, 850±852 (2001). 316. Nestler, E. J. & Landsman, D. Learning about addiction from the human draft genome. Nature 409, 834±835 (2001). 317. Tupler, R., Perini, G. & Green, M. R. Expressing the human genome. Nature 409, 832±835 (2001). 318. Fahrer, A. M., Bazan, J. F., Papathanasiou, P., Nelms, K. A. & Goodnow, C. C. A genomic view of immunology. Nature 409, 836±838 (2001). 319. Li, W. -H., Gu, Z., Wang, H. & Nekrutenko, A. Evolutionary analyses of the human genome. Nature 409, 847±849 (2001). 320. Bock, J. B., Matern, H. T., Peden, A. A. & Scheller, R. H. A genomic perspective on membrane compartment organization. Nature 409, 839±841 (2001). 321. Pollard, T. D. Genomics, the cytoskeleton and motility. Nature 409, 842±843 (2001). 322. Murray, A. W. & Marks, D. Can sequencing shed light on cell cycling? Nature 409, 844±846 (2001). 323. Clayton, J. D., Kyriacou, C. P. & Reppert, S. M. Keeping time with the human genome. Nature 409, 829±831 (2001). 324. Chervitz, S. A. et al. Comparison of the complete protein sets of worm and yeast: orthology and divergence. Science 282, 2022±2028 (1998). 325. Aravind, L. & Subramanian, G. Origin of multicellular eukaryotesÐinsights from proteome comparisons. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 9, 688±694 (1999). 326. Attwood, T. K. et al. PRINTS-S: the database formerly known as PRINTS. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 225± 227 (2000). 327. Hofmann, K., Bucher, P., Falquet, L. & Bairoch, A. The PROSITE database, its status in 1999. Nucleic Acids Res. 27, 215±219 (1999). 328. Altschul, S. F. et al. Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res. 25, 3389±3402 (1997). 329. Wolf, Y. I., Kondrashov, F. A. & Koonin, E. V. No footprints of primordial introns in a eukaryotic genome. Trends Genet. 16, 333±334 (2000). 330. Brunner, H. G., Nelen, M., Breake®eld, X. O., Ropers, H. H. & van Oost, B. B. A. Abnormal behavior associated with a point mutation in the structural gene for monoamine oxidase A. Science 262, 578± 580 (1993). 331. Cases, O. et al. Aggressive behavior and altered amounts of brain serotonin and norepinephrine in mice lacking MAOA. Science 268, 1763±1766 (1995). 332. Brunner, H. G. et al. X-linked borderline mental retardation with prominent behavioral disturbance: phenotype, genetic localization, and evidence for disturbed monoamine metabolism. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 52, 1032±1039 (1993). 333. Deckert, J. et al. Excess of high activity monoamine oxidase A gene promoter alleles in female patients with panic disorder. Hum. Mol. Genet. 8, 621±624 (1999). 334. Smith, T. F. & Waterman, M. S. Identi®cation of common molecular subsequences. J. Mol. Biol. 147, 195±197 (1981). 335. Tatusov, R. L., Koonin, E. V. & Lipman, D. J. A genomic perspective on protein families. Science 278, 631±637 (1997). 336. Ponting, C. P., Aravind, L., Schultz, J., Bork, P. & Koonin, E. V. Eukaryotic signalling domain homologues in archaea and bacteria. Ancient ancestry and horizontal gene transfer. J. Mol. Biol. 289, 729±745 (1999). 337. Zhang, J., Dyer, K. D. & Rosenberg, H. F. Evolution of the rodent eosinophil-associated Rnase gene family by rapid gene sorting and positive selection. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 4701±4706 (2000). 338. Shashoua, V. E. Ependymin, a brain extracellular glycoprotein, and CNS plasticity. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 627, 94±114 (1991). 339. Schultz, J., Copley, R. R., Doerks, T., Ponting, C. P. & Bork, P. SMART: a web-based tool for the study of genetically mobile domains. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 231±234 (2000). 340. Koonin, E. V., Aravind, L. & Kondrashov, A. S. The impact of comparative genomics on our understanding of evolution. Cell 101, 573±576 (2000). 341. Bateman, A., Eddy, S. R. & Chothia, C. Members of the immunoglobulin superfamily in bacteria. Protein Sci. 5, 1939±1941 (1996). 342. Sutherland, D., Samakovlis, C. & Krasnow, M. A. Branchless encodes a Drosophila FGF homolog that controls tracheal cell migration and the pattern of branching. Cell 87, 1091±1101 (1996). 343. Warburton, D. et al. The molecular basis of lung morphogenesis. Mech. Dev. 92, 55±81 (2000). 344. Fuchs, T., Glusman, G., Horn-Saban, S., Lancet, D. & Pilpel, Y. The human olfactory subgenome: from sequence to structure to evolution. Hum. Genet. 108, 1±13 (2001). 345. Glusman, G. et al. The olfactory receptor gene family: data mining, classi®cation and nomenclature. Mamm. Genome 11, 1016±1023 (2000). 346. Rouquier, S. et al. Distribution of olfactory receptor genes in the human genome. Nature Genet. 18, 243±250 (1998). 347. Sharon, D. et al. Primate evolution of an olfactory receptor cluster: Diversi®cation by gene conversion and recent emergence of a pseudogene. Genomics 61, 24±36 (1999). 348. Gilad, Y. et al. Dichotomy of single-nucleotide polymorphism haplotypes in olfactory receptor genes and pseudogenes. Nature Genet. 26, 221±224 (2000). 349. Gearhart, J. & Kirschner, M. Cells, Embryos, and Evolution (Blackwell Science, Malden, Massachusetts, 1997). 350. Barbazuk, W. B. et al. The syntenic relationship of the zebra®sh and human genomes. Genome Res. 10, 1351±1358 (2000). 351. McLysaght, A., Enright, A. J., Skrabanek, L. & Wolfe, K. H. Estimation of synteny conservation and genome compaction between puffer®sh (Fugu) and human. Yeast 17, 22±36 (2000). 352. Trachtulec, Z. et al. Linkage of TATA-binding protein and proteasome subunit C5 genes in mice and humans reveals synteny conserved between mammals and invertebrates. Genomics 44, 1±7 (1997).

918

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

articles
353. Nadeau, J. H. Maps of linkage and synteny homologies between mouse and man. Trends Genet. 5, 82±86 (1989). 354. Nadeau, J. H. & Taylor, B. A. Lengths of chromosomal segments conserved since divergence of man and mouse. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 81, 814±818 (1984). 355. Copeland, N. G. et al. A genetic linkage map of the mouse: current applications and future prospects. Science 262, 57±66 (1993). 356. DeBry, R. W. & Seldin, M. F. Human/mouse homology relationships. Genomics 33, 337±351 (1996). 357. Nadeau, J. H. & Sankoff, D. The lengths of undiscovered conserved segments in comparative maps. Mamm. Genome 9, 491±495 (1998). 358. Thomas, J. W. et al. Comparative genome mapping in the sequence-based era: early experience with human chromosome 7. Genome Res. 10, 624±633 (2000). 359. Pletcher, M. T. et al. Chromosome evolution: The junction of mammalian chromosomes in the formation of mouse chromosome 10. Genome Res. 10, 1463±1467 (2000). 360. Novacek, M. J. Mammalian phylogeny: shaking the tree. Nature 356, 121±125 (1992). 361. O'Brien, S. J. et al. Genome maps 10. Comparative genomics. Mammalian radiations. Wall chart. Science 286, 463±478 (1999). 362. Romer, A. S. Vertebrate Paleontology (Univ. Chicago Press, Chicago and New York, 1966). 363. Paterson, A. H. et al. Toward a uni®ed genetic map of higher plants, transcending the monocot-dicot divergence. Nature Genet. 14, 380±382 (1996). 364. Jenczewski, E., Prosperi, J. M. & Ronfort, J. Differentiation between natural and cultivated populations of Medicago sativa (Leguminosae) from Spain: analysis with random ampli®ed polymorphic DNA (RAPD) markers and comparison to allozymes. Mol. Ecol. 8, 1317±1330 (1999). 365. Ohno, S. Evolution by Gene Duplication (George Allen and Unwin, London, 1970). 366. Wolfe, K. H. & Shields, D. C. Molecular evidence for an ancient duplication of the entire yeast genome. Nature 387, 708±713 (1997). 367. Blanc, G., Barakat, A., Guyot, R., Cooke, R. & Delseny, M. Extensive duplication and reshuf¯ing in the arabidopsis genome. Plant Cell 12, 1093±1102 (2000). 368. Paterson, A. H. et al. Comparative genomics of plant chromosomes. Plant Cell 12, 1523±1540 (2000). 369. Vision, T., Brown, D. & Tanksley, S. The origins of genome duplications in Arabidopsis. Science 290, 2114±2117 (2000). 370. Sidow, A. & Bowman, B. H. Molecular phylogeny. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 1, 451±456 (1991). 371. Sidow, A. & Thomas, W. K. A molecular evolutionary framework for eukaryotic model organisms. Curr. Biol. 4, 596±603 (1994). 372. Sidow, A. Gen(om)e duplications in the evolution of early vertebrates. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 6, 715±722 (1996). 373. Spring, J. Vertebrate evolution by interspeci®c hybridisationÐare we polyploid? FEBS Lett. 400, 2±8 (1997). 374. Skrabanek, L. & Wolfe, K. H. Eukaryote genome duplicationÐwhere's the evidence? Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 8, 694±700 (1998). 375. Hughes, A. L. Phylogenies of developmentally important proteins do not support the hypothesis of two rounds of genome duplication early in vertebrate history. J. Mol. Evol. 48, 565±576 (1999). 376. Lander, E. S. & Schork, N. J. Genetic dissection of complex traits. Science 265, 2037±2048 (1994). 377. Horikawa, Y. et al. Genetic variability in the gene encoding calpain-10 is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Nature Genet. 26, 163±175 (2000). 378. Hastbacka, J. et al. The diastrophic dysplasia gene encodes a novel sulfate transporter: positional cloning by ®ne-structure linkage disequilibrium mapping. Cell 78, 1073±1087 (1994). 379. Tischkoff, S. A. et al. Global patterns of linkage disequilibrium at the CD4 locus and modern human origins. Science 271, 1380±1387 (1996). 380. Kidd, J. R. et al. Haplotypes and linkage disequilibrium at the phenylalanine hydroxylase locus PAH, in a global representation of populations. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63, 1882±1899 (2000). 381. Mateu, E. et al. Worldwide genetic analysis of the CFTR region. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68, 103±117 (2001). 382. Abecasis, G. R. et al. Extent and distribution of linkage disequilibrium in three genomic regions. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68, 191±197 (2001). 383. Taillon-Miller, P. et al. Juxtaposed regions of extensive and minimal linkage disequilibrium in Xq25 and Xq28. Nature Genet. 25, 324±328 (2000). 384. Martin, E. R. et al. SNPing away at complex diseases: analysis of single-nucleotide polymorphisms around APOE in Alzheimer disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67, 383±394 (2000). 385. Collins, A., Lonjou, C. & Morton, N. E. Genetic epidemiology of single-nucleotide polymorphisms. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96, 15173±15177 (1999). 386. Dunning, A. M. et al. The extent of linkage disequilibrium in four populations with distinct demographic histories. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67, 1544±1554 (2000). 387. Rieder, M. J., Taylor, S. L., Clark, A. G. & Nickerson, D. A. Sequence variation in the human angiotensin converting enzyme. Nature Genet. 22, 59±62 (1999). 388. Collins, F. S. Positional cloning moves from perditional to traditional. Nature Genet. 9, 347±350 (1995). 389. Nagamine, K. et al. Positional cloning of the APECED gene. Nature Genet. 17, 393±398 (1997). 390. Reuber, B. E. et al. Mutations in PEX1 are the most common cause of peroxisome biogenesis disorders. Nature Genet. 17, 445±448 (1997). 391. Portsteffen, H. et al. Human PEX1 is mutated in complementation group 1 of the peroxisome biogenesis disorders. Nature Genet. 17, 449±452 (1997). 392. Everett, L. A. et al. Pendred syndrome is caused by mutations in a putative sulphate transporter gene (PDS). Nature Genet. 17, 411±422 (1997). 393. Coffey, A. J. et al. Host response to EBV infection in X-linked lymphoproliferative disease results from mutations in an SH2-domain encoding gene. Nature Genet. 20, 129±135 (1998). 394. Van Laer, L. et al. Nonsyndromic hearing impairment is associated with a mutation in DFNA5. Nature Genet. 20, 194±197 (1998). 395. Sakuntabhai, A. et al. Mutations in ATP2A2, encoding a Ca2+ pump, cause Darier disease. Nature Genet. 21, 271±277 (1999). 396. Gedeon, A. K. et al. Identi®cation of the gene (SEDL) causing X-linked spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda. Nature Genet. 22, 400±404 (1999). 397. Hurvitz, J. R. et al. Mutations in the CCN gene family member WISP3 cause progressive pseudorheumatoid dysplasia. Nature Genet. 23, 94±98 (1999). 398. Laberge-le Couteulx, S. et al. Truncating mutations in CCM1, encoding KRIT1, cause hereditary cavernous angiomas. Nature Genet. 23, 189±193 (1999). 399. Sahoo, T. et al. Mutations in the gene encoding KRIT1, a Krev-1/rap1a binding protein, cause cerebral cavernous malformations (CCM1). Hum. Mol. Genet. 8, 2325±2333 (1999). 400. McGuirt, W. T. et al. Mutations in COL11A2 cause non-syndromic hearing loss (DFNA13). Nature Genet. 23, 413±419 (1999). 401. Moreira, E. S. et al. Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2G is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the sarcomeric protein telethonin. Nature Genet. 24, 163±166 (2000). 402. Ruiz-Perez, V. L. et al. Mutations in a new gene in Ellis-van Creveld syndrome and Weyers acrodental dysostosis. Nature Genet. 24, 283±286 (2000). 403. Kaplan, J. M. et al. Mutations in ACTN4, encoding alpha-actinin-4, cause familial focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Nature Genet. 24, 251±256 (2000). 404. Escayg, A. et al. Mutations of SCN1A, encoding a neuronal sodium channel, in two families with GEFS+2. Nature Genet. 24, 343±345 (2000). 405. Sacksteder, K. A. et al. Identi®cation of the alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde synthase gene, which is defective in familial hyperlysinemia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66, 1736±1743 (2000). 406. Kalaydjieva, L. et al. N-myc downstream-regulated gene 1 is mutated in hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy-Lom. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67, 47±58 (2000). 407. Sundin, O. H. et al. Genetic basis of total colourblindness among the Pingelapese islanders. Nature Genet. 25, 289±293 (2000). 408. Kohl, S. et al. Mutations in the CNGB3 gene encoding the beta-subunit of the cone photoreceptor cGMP-gated channel are responsible for achromatopsia (ACHM3) linked to chromosome 8q21. Hum. Mol. Genet. 9, 2107±2116 (2000). 409. Avela, K. et al. Gene encoding a new RING-B-box-coiled-coil protein is mutated in mulibrey nanism. Nature Genet. 25, 298±301 (2000). 410. Verpy, E. et al. A defect in harmonin, a PDZ domain-containing protein expressed in the inner ear sensory hair cells, underlies usher syndrome type 1C. Nature Genet. 26, 51±55 (2000). 411. Bitner-Glindzicz, M. et al. A recessive contiguous gene deletion causing infantile hyperinsulinism, enteropathy and deafness identi®es the usher type 1C gene. Nature Genet. 26, 56±60 (2000). 412. The May-Hegglin/Fetchner Syndrome Consortium. Mutations in MYH9 result in the May-Hegglin anomaly, and Fechtner and Sebastian syndromes. Nature Genet. 26, 103±105 (2000). 413. Kelley, M. J., Jawien, W., Ortel, T. L. & Korczak, J. F. Mutation of MYH9, encoding non-muscle myosin heavy chain A, in May-Hegglin anomaly. Nature Genet. 26, 106±108 (2000). 414. Kirschner, L. S. et al. Mutations of the gene encoding the protein kinase A type I-a regulatory subunit in patients with the Carney complex. Nature Genet. 26, 89±92 (2000). 415. Lalwani, A. K. et al. Human nonsyndromic hereditary deafness DFNA17 is due to a mutation in non-muscle myosin MYH9. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67, 1121±1128 (2000). 416. Matsuura, T. et al. Large expansion of the ATTCT pentanucleotide repeat in spinocerebellar ataxia type 10. Nature Genet. 26, 191±194 (2000). 417. Delettre, C. et al. Nuclear gene OPA1, encoding a mitochondrial dynamin-related protein, is mutated in dominant optic atrophy. Nature Genet. 26, 207±210 (2000). 418. Pusch, C. M. et al. The complete form of X-linked congenital stationary night blindness is caused by mutations in a gene encoding a leucine-rich repeat protein. Nature Genet. 26, 324±327 (2000). 419. The ADHR Consortium. Autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic rickets is associated with mutations in FGF23. Nature Genet. 26, 345±348 (2000). 420. Bomont, P. et al. The gene encoding gigaxonin, a new member of the cytoskeletal BTB/kelch repeat family, is mutated in giant axonal neuropathy. Nature Genet. 26, 370±374 (2000). 421. Tullio-Pelet, A. et al. Mutant WD-repeat protein in triple-A syndrome. Nature Genet. 26, 332±335 (2000). 422. Nicole, S. et al. Perlecan, the major proteoglycan of basement membranes, is altered in patients with Schwartz-Jampel syndrome (chondrodystrophic myotonia). Nature Genet. 26, 480±483 (2000). 423. Rogaev, E. I. et al. Familial Alzheimer's disease in kindreds with missense mutations in a gene on chromosome 1 related to the Alzheimer's disease type 3 gene. Nature 376, 775±778 (1995). 424. Sherrington, R. et al. Cloning of a gene bearing missense mutations in early-onset familial Alzheimer's disease. Nature 375, 754±760 (1995). 425. Olivieri, N. F. & Weatherall, D. J. The therapeutic reactivation of fetal haemoglobin. Hum. Mol. Genet. 7, 1655±1658 (1998). 426. Drews, J. Research & development. Basic science and pharmaceutical innovation. Nature Biotechnol. 17, 406 (1999). 427. Drews, J. Drug discovery: a historical perspective. Science 287, 1960±1964 (2000). 428. Davies, P. A. et al. The 5-HT3B subunit is a major determinant of serotonin-receptor function. Nature 397, 359±363 (1999). 429. Heise, C. E. et al. Characterization of the human cysteinyl leukotriene 2 receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 30531±30536 (2000). 430. Fan, W. et al. BACE maps to chromosome 11 and a BACE homolog, BACE2, reside in the obligate Down Syndrome region of chromosome 21. Science 286, 1255a (1999). 431. Saunders, A. J., Kim, T. -W. & Tanzi, R. E. BACE maps to chromosome 11 and a BACE homolog, BACE2, reside in the obligate Down Syndrome region of chromosome 21. Science 286, 1255a (1999). 432. Firestein, S. The good taste of genomics. Nature 404, 552±553 (2000). 433. Matsunami, H., Montmayeur, J. P. & Buck, L. B. A family of candidate taste receptors in human and mouse. Nature 404, 601±604 (2000). 434. Adler, E. et al. A novel family of mammalian taste receptors. Cell 100, 693±702 (2000). 435. Chandrashekar, J. et al. T2Rs function as bitter taste receptors. Cell 100, 703±711 (2000). 436. Hardison, R. C. Conserved non-coding sequences are reliable guides to regulatory elements. Trends Genet. 16, 369±372 (2000). 437. Onyango, P. et al. Sequence and comparative analysis of the mouse 1-megabase region orthologous to the human 11p15 imprinted domain. Genome Res. 10, 1697±1710 (2000). 438. Bouck, J. B., Metzker, M. L. & Gibbs, R. A. Shotgun sample sequence comparisons between mouse and human genomes. Nature Genet. 25, 31±33 (2000). 439. Marshall, E. Public-private project to deliver mouse genome in 6 months. Science 290, 242±243 (2000). 440. Wasserman, W. W., Palumbo, M., Thompson, W., Fickett, J. W. & Lawrence, C. E. Human-mouse genome comparisons to locate regulatory sites. Nature Genet. 26, 225±228 (2000). 441. Tagle, D. A. et al. Embryonic epsilon and gamma globin genes of a prosimian primate (Galago crassicaudatus). Nucleotide and amino acid sequences, developmental regulation and phylogenetic footprints. J. Mol. Biol. 203, 439±455 (1988). 442. McGuire, A. M., Hughes, J. D. & Church, G. M. Conservation of DNA regulatory motifs and discovery of new motifs in microbial genomes. Genome Res. 10, 744±757 (2000).

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

919

articles
443. Roth, F. P., Hughes, J. D., Estep, P. W. & Church, G. M. Finding DNA regulatory motifs within unaligned noncoding sequences clustered by whole-genome mRNA quantitation. Nature Biotechnol. 16, 939±945 (1998). 444. Cheng, Y. & Church, G. M. Biclustering of expression data. ISMB 8, 93±103 (2000). 445. Cohen, B. A., Mitra, R. D., Hughes, J. D. & Church, G. M. A computational analysis of wholegenome expression data reveals chromosomal domains of gene expression. Nature Genet. 26, 183± 186 (2000). 446. Feil, R. & Khosla, S. Genomic imprinting in mammals: an interplay between chromatin and DNA methylation? Trends Genet. 15, 431±434 (1999). 447. Robertson, K. D. & Wolffe, A. P. DNA methylation in health and disease. Nature Rev. Genet. 1, 11±19 (2000). 448. Beck, S., Olek, A. & Walter, J. From genomics to epigenomics: a loftier view of life. Nature Biotechnol. 17, 1144±1144 (1999). 449. Hagmann, M. Mapping a subtext in our genetic book. Science 288, 945±946 (2000). 450. Eliot, T. S. in T. S. Eliot. Collected Poems 1909±1962 (Harcourt Brace, New York, 1963). 451. Soderland, C., Longden, I. & Mott, R. FPC: a system for building contigs from restriction ®ngerprinted clones. Comput. Appl. Biosci. 13, 523±535 (1997). 452. Mott, R. & Tribe, R. Approximate statistics of gapped alignments. J. Comp. Biol. 6, 91±112 (1999).

Supplementary Information is available on Nature's World-Wide Web site (http://www.nature.com) or as paper copy from the London editorial of®ce of Nature.

Acknowledgements
Beyond the authors, many people contributed to the success of this work. E. Jordan provided helpful advice throughout the sequencing effort. We thank D. Leja and J. Shehadeh for their expert assistance on the artwork in this paper, especially the foldout ®gure; K. Jegalian for editorial assistance; J. Schloss, E. Green and M. Seldin for comments on an earlier version of the manuscript; P. Green and F. Ouelette for critiques of the submitted version; C. Caulcott, A. Iglesias, S. Renfrey, B. Skene and J. Stewart of the Wellcome Trust, P. Whittington and T. Dougans of NHGRI and M. Meugnier of Genoscope for staff support for meetings of the international consortium; and the University of Pennsylvania for facilities for a meeting of the genome analysis group. We thank Compaq Computer Corporations's High Performance Technical Computing Group for providing a Compaq Biocluster (a 27 node con®guration of AlphaServer ES40s, containing 108 CPUs, serving as compute nodes and a ®le server with one terabyte of secondary storage) to assist in the annotation and analysis. Compaq provided the systems and implementation services to set up and manage the cluster for continuous use by

members of the sequencing consortium. Platform Computing Ltd. provided its LSF scheduling and loadsharing software without license fee. In addition to the data produced by the members of the International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium, the draft genome sequence includes published and unpublished human genomic sequence data from many other groups, all of whom gave permission to include their unpublished data. Four of the groups that contributed particularly signi®cant amounts of data were: M. Adams et al. of the Institute for Genomic Research; E. Chen et al. of the Center for Genetic Medicine and Applied Biosystems; S.-F. Tsai of National Yang-Ming University, Institute of Genetics, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China; and Y. Nakamura, K. Koyama et al. of the Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Human Genome Center, Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan. Many other groups provided smaller numbers of database entries. We thank them all; a full list of the contributors of unpublished sequence is available as Supplementary Information. This work was supported in part by the National Human Genome Research Institute of the US NIH; The Wellcome Trust; the US Department of Energy, Of®ce of Biological and Environmental Research, Human Genome Program; the UK MRC; the Human Genome Sequencing Project from the Science and Technology Agency (STA) Japan; the Ministry of Education, Science, Sport and Culture, Japan; the French Ministry of Research; the Federal È German Ministry of Education, Research and Technology (BMBF) through Projekttrager È DLR, in the framework of the German Human Genome Project; BEO, Projekttrager Biologie, Energie, Umwelt des BMBF und BMWT; the Max-Planck-Society; DFGÐ È È Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft; TMWFK, Thuringer Ministerium fur Wissenschaft, Forschung und Kunst; EC BIOMED2ÐEuropean Commission, Directorate Science, Research and Development; Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC); US National Science Foundation EPSCoR and The SNP Consortium Ltd. Additional support for members of the Genome Analysis group came, in part, from an ARCS Foundation Scholarship to T.S.F., a Burroughs Wellcome Foundation grant to C.B.B. and P.A.S., a DFG grant to P.B., DOE grants to D.H., E.E.E. and T.S.F., an EU grant to P.B., a Marie-Curie Fellowship to L.C., an NIH-NHGRI grant to S.R.E., an NIH grant to E.E.E., an NIH SBIR to D.K., an NSF grant to D.H., a Swiss National Science Foundation grant to L.C., the David and Lucille Packard Foundation, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the University of California at Santa Cruz and the W. M. Keck Foundation. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to E. S. Lander (e-mail: lander@genome.wi.mit.edu), R. H. Waterston (e-mail: bwaterst@watson.wustl.edu), J. Sulston (e-mail: jes@sanger.ac.uk) or F. S. Collins (e-mail: fc23a@nih.gov).

Af®liations for authors: 1, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Center for Genome Research, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA; 2, The Sanger Centre, The Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire CB10 1RQ, United Kingdom; 3, Washington University Genome Sequencing Center, Box 8501, 4444 Forest Park Avenue, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA; 4, US DOE Joint Genome Institute, 2800 Mitchell Drive, Walnut Creek, California 94598, USA; 5, Baylor College of Medicine Human Genome Sequencing Center, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA; 6, Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, Texas 78229-3900, USA; 7, Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1635 Poplar Street, Bronx, New York 10461, USA; 8, Baylor College of Medicine Human Genome Sequencing Center and the Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Medical School, PO Box 20708, Houston, Texas 77225, USA; 9, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku Yokohama-city, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan; 10, Genoscope and CNRS UMR-8030, 2 Rue Gaston Cremieux, CP 5706, 91057 Evry Cedex, France; 11, GTC Sequencing Center, Genome Therapeutics Corporation, 100 Beaver Street, Waltham, Massachusetts 02453-8443, USA; 12, Department of Genome Analysis, Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, Beutenbergstrasse 11, D-07745 Jena, Germany; 13, Beijing Genomics Institute/Human Genome Center, Institute of Genetics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China; 14, Southern China National Human Genome Research Center, Shanghai 201203, China; 15, Northern China National Human Genome Research Center, Beijing 100176, China; 16, Multimegabase Sequencing Center, The Institute for Systems Biology, 4225 Roosevelt Way, NE Suite 200, Seattle, Washington 98105, USA; 17, Stanford Genome Technology Center, 855 California Avenue, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA; 18, Stanford Human Genome Center and Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305-5120, USA; 19, University of Washington Genome Center, 225 Fluke Hall on Mason Road, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA; 20, Department of Molecular Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; 21, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, 6000 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, Texas 75235-8591, USA; 22, University of
920

Oklahoma's Advanced Center for Genome Technology, Dept. of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oklahoma, 620 Parrington Oval, Rm 311, Norman, Oklahoma 73019, USA; 23, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 73, 14195 Berlin, Germany; 24, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Lita Annenberg Hazen Genome Center, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA; 25, GBF - German Research Centre for Biotechnology, Mascheroder Weg 1, D-38124 Braunschweig, Germany; 26, National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bldg. 38A, 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, Maryland 20894, USA; 27, Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve School of Medicine and University Hospitals of Cleveland, BRB 720, 10900 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA; 28, EMBL European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, È Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, United Kingdom; 29, Max Delbruck Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rossle-Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin-Buch, Germany; 30, EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69012 Heidelberg, Germany; 31, Dept. of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139-4307, USA; 32, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Dept. of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri 63110, USA; 33, Dept. of Computer Science, University of California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA; 34, Affymetrix, Inc., 2612 8th St, Berkeley, California 94710, USA; 35, Genome Exploration Research Group, Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan; 36, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Computer Science, University of California at Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA; 37, University of Dublin, Trinity College, Department of Genetics, Smur®t Institute, Dublin 2, Ireland; 38, Cambridge Research Laboratory, Compaq Computer Corporation and MIT Genome Center, 1 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA; 39, Dept. of Mathematics, University of California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA; 40, Dept. of Biology, University of California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA; 41, Crown Human Genetics Center and Department of Molecular Genetics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 71600, Israel; 42, Dept. of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA; 43, The University of Michigan Medical School, Departments of Human Genetics and Internal Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan
NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

articles
48109, USA; 44, MRC Functional Genetics Unit, Department of Human Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK; 45, Institute for Systems Biology, 4225 Roosevelt Way NE, Seattle, WA 98105, USA; 46, National Human Genome Research Institute, US National Institutes of Health, 31 Center Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA; 47, Of®ce of Science, US Department of Energy, 19901 Germantown Road, Germantown, Maryland 20874, USA; 48, The Wellcome Trust, 183 Euston Road, London, NW1 2BE, UK. ² Present addresses: Genome Sequencing Project, Egea Biosciences, Inc., 4178 Sorrento Valley Blvd., Suite F, San Diego, CA 92121, USA (G.A.E.); INRA, Station Â d'Amelioration des Plantes, 63039 Clermont-Ferrand Cedex 2, France (L.C.).

DNA sequence databases
GenBank, National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bldg. 38A, 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, Maryland 20894, USA EMBL, European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK DNA Data Bank of Japan, Center for Information Biology, National Institute of Genetics, 1111 Yata, Mishima-shi, Shizuoka-ken 411-8540, Japan

NATURE | VOL 409 | 15 FEBRUARY 2001 | www.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

921

